[Amit Varma]: I've always distrusted the state, especially the Indian state. I was born in the 1970s,
[Amit Varma]: I grew up in the 80s and 90s. I had a close up view of government. My distrust of the
[Amit Varma]: state was given an intellectual framework when I got into political philosophy. And
[Amit Varma]: when I learned public choice theory, a branch of economics that studies how everyone in
[Amit Varma]: politics should be looked upon as a human being responding to incentives. The incentives
[Amit Varma]: of a politician are always to win the next election. They need money for this. Money
[Amit Varma]: demands a quid pro quo. The next election is always nearby. So all the incentives are
[Amit Varma]: short term incentives. And politicians soon realized that governance doesn't matter, especially
[Amit Varma]: when his benefits are unseen, and narratives matter. Voters are also self interested and
[Amit Varma]: their apathy is rational. Since their one vote will seldom decide an election, why waste
[Amit Varma]: too much time educating yourself on governance and economics and policy and so on. When they
[Amit Varma]: do vote, it may be because of other incentives, like signaling loyalty to their tribe, or
[Amit Varma]: just to get a free bag of rice. And the third piece of this puzzle are bureaucrats. bureaucrats
[Amit Varma]: also respond to incentives. According to the economist William Niskanen, what they really
[Amit Varma]: care about are court, salary, perks of the office, public reputation, power, patronage,
[Amit Varma]: and the ease of managing the bureau, stop good. They also want to play it safe. Continuing
[Amit Varma]: the status quo is a safe option, and reforms are risky and could backfire. From all this,
[Amit Varma]: we can conclude that the state is an oppressive beast that just grows and grows and grows.
[Amit Varma]: It accumulates power and never gives any of it away. Every state is on a slow lurch towards
[Amit Varma]: becoming a predatory state akin to a colonial power with native rulers. And yet, despite
[Amit Varma]: these dark words, there is hope, because human beings contain multitudes, and they respond
[Amit Varma]: to a multitude of incentives, not just those that arise from their position. Some are animated
[Amit Varma]: by principles they hold dear. Some would genuinely like to make the world a better place. I would
[Amit Varma]: hold in my cynical way that this is an exception. But when these outliers express themselves,
[Amit Varma]: my God, it's beautiful. This is what happened in 1991, when we opened up large parts of
[Amit Varma]: our economy. For once, the government got out of the way of society, and immediately
[Amit Varma]: our economy boomed. And in the next 20 years, hundreds of millions of people were lifted
[Amit Varma]: out of poverty. I used to mistakenly believe that these reforms happened only because of
[Amit Varma]: our balance of payments crisis and the conditions EIMF set to bail us out and so on. But I have
[Amit Varma]: since discovered that a group of bureaucrats and wonks within the government spent almost
[Amit Varma]: a decade, the whole of the 1980s, preparing the master plan that was eventually put in
[Amit Varma]: place in 1991. I've had episodes on the reforms and on PV Narasimha Rao who made them politically
[Amit Varma]: viable. And right now, I want to draw your attention to the following names, many of
[Amit Varma]: which you may not even have heard of. Rakesh Mohan, Amarnath Verma, IG Patel, Vijay Kelkar,
[Amit Varma]: Ashok Desai, Naresh Chandra, Montek Singh Aluwalia. And there are many more like this
[Amit Varma]: unsung heroes whose actions put food in the plates of unseen millions and gave hope to
[Amit Varma]: a nation. My guest today is one of these remarkable men.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma. Welcome to the scene and the unseen. My guest
[Amit Varma]: today is Montek Singh Aluwalia, who lived the Indian dream of the 50s and 60s and 70s
[Amit Varma]: when he went abroad, studied at Oxford, got a job in the World Bank, escaped his circumstances.
[Amit Varma]: But Montek then did something unusual. He came back to India and joined the government
[Amit Varma]: in the late 1970s determined to be a force for good. He bided his time for a decade,
[Amit Varma]: pushed reforms where he could, made alliances, combined thought and action wherever it was
[Amit Varma]: possible and came out with a legendary policy paper in 1990 called the M document. It laid
[Amit Varma]: out a detailed roadmap of what India needed to do to lift the country to a better place.
[Amit Varma]: He got his chance in 1991 and worked closely with his friend and mentor Manmohan Singh
[Amit Varma]: to carry out many of these reforms. He remained a key player for the next couple of decades
[Amit Varma]: and even wrote a fabulous book about his experiences called Backstage, the story behind India's
[Amit Varma]: growth years. His wife, the late Ishwarja Aluwalia was also a formidable economist and
[Amit Varma]: I recommend her memoir as well called Breaking Through. Montek is 78 today and still full
[Amit Varma]: of ideas, still full of hope for our great nation. I learned a lot from my conversation
[Amit Varma]: with him and I'm sure you'll enjoy it as well. But before we go there, let's take a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break. And as so often, I don't actually have a commercial, but what the hell,
[Amit Varma]: let's do this for love.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, The Art of
[Amit Varma]: Clear Writing. An online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have
[Amit Varma]: workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students and vibrant community interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction,
[Amit Varma]: a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST
[Amit Varma]: or about $150 and is a monthly thing. So if you're interested, head on over to register
[Amit Varma]: at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing. Being
[Amit Varma]: a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard and a clear
[Amit Varma]: idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Montek, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Nice to be here. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I just want to, I don't want to embarrass you, but I want to start off by
[Amit Varma]: saying that to me and to many of my listeners, no doubt, you know, you and that your entire
[Amit Varma]: band of, you know, reformers who did what they did 91 onwards are heroes for us. I mean,
[Amit Varma]: we might live different lives if not for you. So
[Guest]: Very nice. Very nice to hear good things. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And it's such a privilege for me that, you know, you made the time to come here today.
[Amit Varma]: I'd like to sort of start by asking you about your early life because one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that sort of fascinates me and one of the themes I examine with my guests is, is sort
[Amit Varma]: of the texture of their lives and their growing up years because one of the mistakes I made
[Amit Varma]: and I'm 48 and one of the mistakes I make sometimes is that I assume that the things
[Amit Varma]: that I know and the things that I've lived through are shared experiences by everyone.
[Amit Varma]: But I think more than 60 and close to 70% of the country is actually born after liberalization.
[Amit Varma]: They don't have lived experience of the times before it. And I was just struck with this
[Amit Varma]: factoid when I was reading about your life, that actually, the US Civil War is closer
[Amit Varma]: to your birth than we are now. You know, that's kind of, I'm sorry, I didn't mean to make
[Amit Varma]: you kind of feel old, but I'm and you you are older than India, you are older than our
[Amit Varma]: nation state. So tell me a little bit about, you know, where were you born? What was your
[Amit Varma]: childhood like?
[Guest]: Okay, well, you know, I was born in Rawalpindi. That time, it was part of undivided India.
[Guest]: And my parents moved from Pakistan without, my father was in any case, posted in India,
[Guest]: as we now know it. And he used to be in defense accounts. He joined the civil service as a
[Guest]: clerk in those days, British times, that was a probably higher up the ladder than it is
[Guest]: now. But you know, we were not privileged, privileged family, typical, what would then
[Guest]: be called middle class, lower than the middle of the middle class, if you like. I have no
[Guest]: recollection, therefore, of partition. My earliest memories are really of Sikandar,
[Guest]: not Sikandarabad, Ambala. Just after independence, we were in Ambala. And then after the police
[Guest]: action in Hyderabad, the army moved into Hyderabad. And my father being in defense accounts, the
[Guest]: accountants moved in the wake of the army. So I was there in Hyderabad, that was really
[Guest]: when I grew up in Sikandarabad, which is a twin city, as you know. And I was there till
[Guest]: 1957 when we moved to Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about your father, Mr. Jagmohan Singh. I was struck by this paragraph
[Amit Varma]: in your book backstage where you write, my father Jagmohan Singh graduated from Khalsa
[Amit Varma]: College Amritsar and joined the Department of Defense Accounts as a clerk. He was a reclusive
[Amit Varma]: person with a strong moral conscience and an abiding sense of duty. He put whatever
[Amit Varma]: little savings he had in a bank account, strictly avoiding investments in stocks, which he viewed
[Amit Varma]: as a form of speculation, stop quote. And you know, one thing that I sometimes speculate
[Amit Varma]: on is how much our character and the things that we do is determined in a sense by circumstance.
[Amit Varma]: That when you are in a circumstance like that, where you have a family to look after, and
[Amit Varma]: the nation's going through so much turmoil, you would in a sense, naturally be inclined
[Amit Varma]: to be cautious and to be careful and to kind of, you know, give importance to all of those
[Amit Varma]: things. Later on in your book, you mentioned about how when you were in Oxford, when that
[Amit Varma]: phase got over, you'd been offered a plush job in the private sector over there. But
[Amit Varma]: you chose not to do it because you felt that you had to give something back to the country
[Amit Varma]: and in some way, work within the government, work in development, economics, and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And that again, being something that I think you mentioned in your book that your wife
[Amit Varma]: speculated that you probably got it from your dad. So in hindsight, when I look back on
[Amit Varma]: my own childhood, I can see the various ways good and bad, in which I was sort of shaped
[Amit Varma]: by my parents. And one is of course shaped by many things, not just parents, peers, and
[Amit Varma]: so on. But as you were a traveling family, you know, first Saharanpur, then Ambala, then
[Amit Varma]: Secunderabad, then at the age of 14, Delhi, I guess that your parents must have been a
[Amit Varma]: really big influence on you. So tell me a little bit about that, that when you look
[Amit Varma]: back in hindsight, what are the when you, you know, look at the young Monte kind of
[Amit Varma]: growing up in that kind of house in those kind of times? What do you see now?
[Guest]: Well, I think my upbringing, both my parents are very concerned to bring us up as best
[Guest]: they could. It was a mother who actually did most of the, what you would call child caring.
[Guest]: But my father was very concerned about our education. Also, I mentioned in the book that,
[Guest]: you know, my mother lost her younger brother, who was actually a lieutenant in the army.
[Guest]: He died to an accident in a mountaineering expedition. So we came to Delhi for about
[Guest]: 10 days. And my father felt I mean, I was like at that time, maybe only about nine or
[Guest]: 10 years old. But my father felt that missing out my school for 10 days is bad. And he was
[Guest]: very concerned that I shouldn't slip in mathematics, because like many people, he regarded that
[Guest]: as critical. And I was really surprised that he got permission from his office. I mean,
[Guest]: he was very dedicated, office going type, to take two hours leave in order to sit in
[Guest]: my class and take notes so that I wouldn't miss anything on the maths front. It was my
[Guest]: first indication that he really cared a lot about what happened to my education. I mean,
[Guest]: the next similar indication was, you know, towards the end of his service, he was very
[Guest]: well thought of. And he had worked his way up from being a clerk to being an officer,
[Guest]: but he was not in the Indian Defense Account Service, which is the grade A service of that
[Guest]: system. And so they said to him that, look, we'd like to make you a promotee. So you know,
[Guest]: for those guys becoming and having IDAS after your name was a big thing. But they said,
[Guest]: look, if we make you IDAS, you'll be in charge of a defense accounts office. You're here
[Guest]: in Secunderabad, but you'll be sent to a much smaller place where, you know, the head of
[Guest]: the office is the junior most IDAS person. The alternative, if you don't want that, is
[Guest]: we could send you to Delhi for the last two years of your career. And well, you'll be
[Guest]: able to settle your family before retiring and so on. And you know, my father thought
[Guest]: about that. And he said that he chose that consciously giving up the IDAS because he
[Guest]: felt we would get a better education. And I mean, he was right that I moved into Delhi
[Guest]: Public School. I enjoyed it. It was a better school than the school I was in Secunderabad.
[Guest]: Results and all were better. And you know, when I look back, it's quite possible that
[Guest]: if we hadn't moved, I don't think I would have had as good an academic career as I ended
[Guest]: up having. I may not have got the Rhodes Scholarship. So really a very critical decision on the
[Guest]: part of my father. And I'm the biggest beneficiary of it. So there was a lot of concern, a lot
[Guest]: of principles, deeply believed in simple life. And I think that did influence me. You know,
[Guest]: you mentioned this business of giving back to the, that's not how I viewed. I think I
[Guest]: belong to the generation immediately after independence, which actually believed that,
[Guest]: you know, the government was going to, so to speak, develop the country. So the task
[Guest]: of joining a development oriented government that would remake the country was a very exciting
[Guest]: task. And you know, I, when I went, even when I went to Oxford, I thought I would just sit
[Guest]: for the IAS. And I even began preparing for it. But you know, I'd done well in Oxford
[Guest]: and job offers came. I wasn't at all interested in the private sector. It just wasn't my thing.
[Guest]: But I got tempted when the World Bank started recruiting and they said, well, we need people
[Guest]: who can work on what's going on in different developing countries. So I felt that that
[Guest]: might actually help me in my desire to work on development. And I thought I was going
[Guest]: there for three years and stayed on for nine, which was quite a long time. But anyway, I
[Guest]: didn't regret it. And I thought I enjoyed, not nine, actually, I think I stayed for 11
[Guest]: years, between 68 and 79. And then finally came back. I think both my wife and I wanted
[Guest]: to come back. And she was particularly concerned that as soon as our kids were born, we should
[Guest]: come back. I mean, she also wanted to do work, her own work. She was an economist, was in
[Guest]: India. But I think the bringing up children was crucial. So our oldest son had been born,
[Guest]: and the younger one was about to be born. And she felt this is the time to go. And an
[Guest]: opportunity opened up in the finance ministry, and I took it.
[Amit Varma]: Going back to your childhood, one of the things that I was sort of struck by while reading
[Amit Varma]: backstage is you describe how after DPS Mathura, you had to wait for a year before you could
[Amit Varma]: join Delhi University. So because you were, you know, two months short of the minimum
[Amit Varma]: age. So you write, quote, I use the time to delve into some books on economics that I
[Amit Varma]: borrowed from the British Council Library on Rafi Mark. This gave me a feel for the
[Amit Varma]: subject and helped convince me of for the BA Honours course in economics in Delhi University,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote. And I was struck by this because I've had many economists on the show. No one
[Amit Varma]: read economics for fun when they were kids. Right. So it's almost as if, you know, you'd
[Amit Varma]: expect people to read racy novels or comics or whatever.
[Guest]: I did all of that too. Okay. Remember, I had a whole year to waste. So compared to these
[Guest]: other economists that you're talking about, I had more time. And I didn't want to spend
[Guest]: all that time reading novels and comics. So having time, I said, look, economics was a
[Guest]: new subject. We never did any economics in school. So, you know, before taking the plunge
[Guest]: into economics, I really wanted to see what, what would the books be like?
[Guest]: What did you read? Do you remember?
[Guest]: Actually I don't come to think of it. It wasn't one of these standard textbooks. It was this
[Guest]: older generation of, you know, things written in the 1930s and 40s. For example, I don't
[Guest]: remember reading Alfred Marshall's Principles. That was a kind of heavy textbook of the time.
[Guest]: And you know, people like Samuelson and so on hadn't quite made the impact that they
[Guest]: obviously they dominated textbooks later on. But it wasn't textbooks so much as books on
[Guest]: economics. Not very interesting, but it sufficiently convinced me that it's a subject that I think
[Guest]: I would enjoy, basically.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit more about that period. Like, what is the other stuff you were reading,
[Amit Varma]: what you were doing? Like, I enjoy sort of looking back on, you know, just thinking about
[Amit Varma]: how every 15 year old holds a seed, in a sense, for the 40 year old, for the 75 year old,
[Amit Varma]: you know, when you look back on the young 15 year old, you or the 12 year old, you or
[Amit Varma]: whatever, you know, what is that seed? And at one level, that seed leads you to the part
[Amit Varma]: that you took. But are there other seeds that lead you down other paths?
[Guest]: Well, I think I was quite interested in history, even then. And again, I owe that a little
[Guest]: bit to my father. I mean, when we were in Secunderabad, for example, he had brought
[Guest]: home from his library, K. A. Nilakanth Shastri's History of South India, which, you know, later
[Guest]: on we never read. But it was interesting in Secunderabad, reading about the history of
[Guest]: South India. I think it's one of the gaps, if you like, in the regular educational process,
[Guest]: that we don't give enough attention to the fact that there's not necessarily an Indian
[Guest]: history. I mean, this is a big country and different parts of it have sort of had different
[Guest]: histories. So I was always interested in history and then historical novels. But of course,
[Guest]: most of the historical novels I read were really Western. And actually my favorite in
[Guest]: those days, I read through the whole of Alexander Dumas, for example.
[Amit Varma]: And what was your conception of yourself at that time? Like, what did you want to be?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I don't think a 14 or 15 year old ever says, I'm going to be an economist, I'm
[Amit Varma]: going to be a policy wonk, I'm going to do all these things.
[Guest]: Oh, I think at that point, I didn't really think I wanted to be a policy wonk. I think
[Guest]: at that point, I just thought I would sit for the IAS and do good and participate in
[Guest]: the development of the country. The realization that there's a profession that one could follow
[Guest]: came quite a bit later.
[Amit Varma]: In your wife's excellent autobiography, she mentions that when she first met your dad,
[Amit Varma]: they bonded immediately because of his because he could talk about both English, English
[Amit Varma]: literature and Punjabi poetry, you know, so one senses that there is a multilingual kind
[Amit Varma]: of upbringing happening here that at one level, you are sort of rooted, she's spoken, and
[Amit Varma]: I think you've mentioned as well, you know, being part of the Sikh community, and it's
[Amit Varma]: something that you take seriously. At the same time, there is a certain westernization
[Amit Varma]: also in that upbringing, where like you mentioned, you're reading Dumas, and later on, when your
[Amit Varma]: wife mentions in a book that you would watch a lot of European cinema, when you were in
[Amit Varma]: the US, you'd watch, you know, in the Sika and Fellini and all of that. And it's just
[Amit Varma]: a sort of mixture of these two. So that, you know, when I look back on how I kind of grew
[Amit Varma]: up, and I also had a privileged upbringing, my dad was an IAS officer born a couple of
[Amit Varma]: years before you, in fact, again, in what is now Pakistan. And one of the things one
[Amit Varma]: of the negative aspects of my upbringing was that it was unfortunately so westernized,
[Amit Varma]: that I wasn't too rooted as a young person in the sense that I would actively look down
[Amit Varma]: on, you know, I'd have this snobbish attitude about, say, Hindi cinema, or about other aspects
[Amit Varma]: of our culture. And then it took to kind of getting a little bit older and with time figuring
[Amit Varma]: out that, you know, that that attitude was fundamentally wrong, that on the contrary,
[Amit Varma]: it's a privilege to be surrounded by the richness of different languages and different cultures
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. So how did you sort of navigate those different cultural influences? And do
[Amit Varma]: you think, therefore, that in a fundamental way, it makes an Indian economist different
[Amit Varma]: from, say, a European economist, in the sense that they have one language or at most two,
[Amit Varma]: while you have different languages and a much richer web of sort of influences to draw upon?
[Guest]: That's a very good, very good question. Let me give you a considered answer. First, you
[Guest]: know, when I was growing up, I don't think I was adequately aware of the richness of
[Guest]: this cultural tradition, to a large extent that came to me through my wife. Because Isha
[Guest]: used to say that she herself was what they used to call a Hindi medium type. She was
[Guest]: not comfortable in English through most of her school days, because she went to Shikshayat
[Guest]: school in Kolkata, which had Hindi medium. It's only when she went to presidency in Kolkata
[Guest]: that she started getting an education in English medium. And she felt that she was a little
[Guest]: behind the other kids. She worked hard at it, of course, and made up, but she was very
[Guest]: conscious of that. And, you know, part of the bonding between her and my father was
[Guest]: that he was very interested in Punjabi poetry, not religious stuff, but Punjabi poetry. And
[Guest]: since he read, he could read, he used to do the reading of poetry, he read it in the Arabic
[Guest]: script, Urdu script, because in, you know, Punjabi men in those days, the women would
[Guest]: learn the Gurmukhi script, the men would learn the Arabic script, because after all, a lot
[Guest]: of the official recording, etc. was in Urdu. In Ranjit Singh's court, the official language
[Guest]: was Persian. So you know, it gives you a sense that we don't kind of adequately realize.
[Guest]: So I think Isha interacted very nicely with my father, because she had a very strong grounding.
[Guest]: In her case, Punjabi, in terms of what she got from Gurbani, the religious part, and
[Guest]: he was much more interested in Heer Ranja and that kind of stuff. So I think they bonded
[Guest]: quite well. Now, you know, linguistic variety is, of course, one thing. It reflects a much
[Guest]: more substantial economic structural variety in the country. I mean, you know, people don't
[Guest]: realize that the difference between the richest states of India and the poorest states of
[Guest]: India, in terms of per capita GDP, something like five is to one. So I mean, and these
[Guest]: are huge areas. So each one of them in the United Nations would be in a separate country.
[Guest]: So when you're running a country with such a wide disparity of economic structure, you
[Guest]: need to have a different approach to how all this is going to pull together. And you know,
[Guest]: in my book, I do mention, when I was deputy chairman of the Planning Commission, it struck
[Guest]: me that we were not analyzing the structural constraints of each state, which were distinct
[Guest]: to it. There was a tendency to basically describe economic problems as the same. I mean, everybody
[Guest]: has to have infrastructure, everybody has agriculture, that's important. But you know,
[Guest]: in some parts of the country, agriculture is very powerfully influenced by extreme shortages
[Guest]: of water. In other parts of the country, water is not a problem. And I don't think that we
[Guest]: took adequate, paid adequate attention to these differences. So in that sense, I think
[Guest]: that's partly a reflection of how much the country varies. And you know, this has to
[Guest]: be then combined with the fact that there's a lot of migration that takes place. So people
[Guest]: from the poor parts of the country migrate to the richer parts of the country, and they
[Guest]: send back, if you like, messages or perceptions about what's it what's it like elsewhere.
[Guest]: And this is a very strong sort of substructure cultural interaction that's taking place,
[Guest]: which as an economist, you should know more about. And this is where sociology also comes
[Guest]: in. And I would say that, when I think about it, we should have been more aware of these
[Guest]: things than we were.
[Amit Varma]: Manmohan Singh is saying in the book at one point, that you can't take 10% of the population
[Amit Varma]: into the 21st century, leaving the remaining 90% in the 19th century. And this is one striking
[Amit Varma]: thing about India that there are parts of it in the 19th century 20th, and a small set
[Amit Varma]: of elites, you know, who are fortunate enough, like us to enjoy the 21st. And we normalise
[Amit Varma]: it. And because we normalise it, I sometimes feel that we may be blind to the fissures
[Amit Varma]: that sort of develop in our society, because of these differences. And these differences
[Amit Varma]: go deeper than just talking about say, economic inequality between states, like you mentioned,
[Amit Varma]: you know, they exist at a social level, a cultural level. And of course, our society
[Amit Varma]: these days is, you know, deeply divided in different ways. But there are, you know, divisions
[Amit Varma]: that have kind of always sort of existed. And I don't even mean in the pure sense of
[Amit Varma]: the potential for conflict or all of that, or the adversarial nature of some of these
[Amit Varma]: divisions, but just in the sense that there is then a danger for an elite governing class,
[Amit Varma]: for example, to have an idea of India, that is based too much on what they kind of see
[Amit Varma]: around them and what they study in books, and so on and so forth. And this is almost
[Amit Varma]: in some senses, it seems even if you're well intentioned, and you try to make an effort,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the nuances and complexities are way too much. And therefore, just thinking
[Amit Varma]: aloud, this would even be an argument for a much greater degree of local governance.
[Amit Varma]: And in some senses, saying that a country as large and varied as this is fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: ungovernable from the center from in a top down kind of way. And that might be a fundamental
[Amit Varma]: mistake that we made. So I'm just thinking aloud. But what are sort of your thoughts?
[Guest]: Well, no, I certainly that when you have a country with wide differences within it, and
[Guest]: it starts to open up and interact with the world, that is likely to increase the extent
[Guest]: of the differential. I mean, the country as a whole benefits, and those that benefit early
[Guest]: are the ones that are already in a good position. Hopefully, the others watch what's happening,
[Guest]: and they start emulating them, and they also grow. The solution, in my view, is not that
[Guest]: you shut yourself off. It's certainly true that if you shut yourself off, you can just
[Guest]: keep stagnating. But here you open up. The ideal thinking, of course, is that when you
[Guest]: open up, an economist will say that, look, your growth rate will go up from 5% to 7%,
[Guest]: which is what happened. But you know, in a politician's mind, when he's addressing a
[Guest]: big audience, he'd like that to mean that every one of you was benefiting at 5%. Now
[Guest]: you're all going to benefit at 7%. Inequality is one thing, but if everybody's benefiting,
[Guest]: that can kind of make people accept it. But the truth is, that's not what happens. Some
[Guest]: of you are going to benefit not 7%, but 8%, 9%. And some of you probably only 2%. And
[Guest]: you know, in an extreme case, you can even theoretically imagine that you might get worse
[Guest]: off. Although, of course, as a family, you don't necessarily get worse off. I mean, in
[Guest]: the sense that the guys who used to run tongas in Delhi basically lost their jobs. Maybe
[Guest]: some of them found some other jobs. But their kids probably run taxis. There's a bit of
[Guest]: an internal redistribution within a family, which tends to moderate that. And we have
[Guest]: to accept the fact that in a market economy, it is very difficult for a change that will
[Guest]: do well for the economy to actually lead to an equal benefit across the country. That's
[Guest]: why you have to be watchful. What are you doing for those that are left behind? And
[Guest]: to be fair, in all our thinking, that's been driven home to us right from the beginning.
[Guest]: I mean, this whole focus that poverty must be a focus, you must reduce poverty, and all
[Guest]: this kind of stuff, which was there for the last 20, 30 years, reflects that. But I think,
[Guest]: you know, poverty tends to focus only on whatever the bottom 20, the bottom 30, the bottom 40%.
[Guest]: It doesn't sort of reflect the unevenness of benefits in, let's say, the top 50. So
[Guest]: in a structure where somebody was maybe not poor, maybe they were in the 50th percentile,
[Guest]: but they don't do very well. And somebody in the 60th percentile does very well. Poverty
[Guest]: is not affected, but you can get a sense of discomfort, and that can lead to social tension.
[Guest]: Now this is why the only factor that you have that can counter that is a well-functioning
[Guest]: democratic system. Because democracy sends that message back, and politicians know how
[Guest]: to read it. They know that some things they can manage, and some kind of things they can't
[Guest]: manage. And therefore, how fast they respond to those things determines the end result.
[Guest]: And I mean, we have to recognize that whoever's running a complex country like this has to
[Guest]: keep this in mind. Now the second issue which you raised is, does all this have to be looked
[Guest]: at by some centralized government? You know, in India, it cannot be, because the Constitution
[Guest]: itself allocates certain things entirely to the states. I think the real issue in India
[Guest]: is that we don't have really good devolution below the state level. And I mean, a state,
[Guest]: the largest state in the country is 200 million people. That's too large. I'm very much in
[Guest]: favor that we should multiply the number of states. If every state was kind of reduced
[Guest]: to maybe, if the largest state did not exceed 30 million, we would be a lot better off.
[Guest]: And frankly, if you think about it, that's probably the only way of getting a lot of
[Guest]: cities developed. Because if you produce another 30 states, you'd have another 30 capitals.
[Guest]: And automatically, a kind of energy would go towards developing these capitals. And
[Guest]: frankly, India needs, I mean, you know, in the next 30 years, urban population is going
[Guest]: to double. I mean, it's what most estimates suggest that from about 300 and something
[Guest]: million into 2011, the urban population will be 800 million by 2050. Now, this is going
[Guest]: to just to accommodate this, you need many, many more of our medium cities to become bigger
[Guest]: cities. And the best way of making them bigger cities is to create new states. We've created
[Guest]: a few, but you know, we could create many more.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I couldn't agree with you more. And just to underscore that point about the
[Amit Varma]: importance of local knowledge of governance being as local as possible. I did an episode
[Amit Varma]: with Abhinandan Sekhri, the journalist, and he was telling me about this experience where
[Amit Varma]: they went to some village in the northeast with a TV crew, they were shooting something
[Amit Varma]: and he asked the people there, okay, what do you really want from your government? What
[Amit Varma]: is the one thing you want? And, you know, somebody sitting in Delhi would imagine they
[Amit Varma]: want schools or they want hospitals or they want roads or whatever those kind of things.
[Amit Varma]: And they said, we want a cinema theatre. And he said, Why do you want a cinema theatre?
[Amit Varma]: He said, because all the boys in this village, they have nothing to do in their spare time.
[Amit Varma]: So they go to the nearby place nearby, near a city to watch movies. And the roads are
[Amit Varma]: so bad. And there are so many accidents that the mortality rate is too high and they keep
[Amit Varma]: dying. So we don't want them to go, we want a cinema theatre here. And there's such a
[Amit Varma]: profound insight, which you know, can only arise locally.
[Guest]: I have a very nice story of a parallel kind. When the Soviet Union cracked up, in 91, all
[Guest]: these new republics were created. I was sent to some of the stans around our neighborhood,
[Guest]: because they'd become independent countries. And we had long relationships with the old
[Guest]: Soviet Union. So we wanted to let each one of these know that, listen, is there something
[Guest]: we can do for you? So I was told to tell them that, you know, maybe you want to send some
[Guest]: of your people to our banking training school, our diplomatic training school, all kinds
[Guest]: of things. And you know, the one thing that they all said was, you know, what would be
[Guest]: really good? Why don't you be more Indian movies, because they're incredibly popular.
[Guest]: I mean, this was an extremely low cost thing to do. But I was struck that in places like
[Guest]: Turkmenistan, and so on, when I had gone to, I think some carpet weaving outfit, and there
[Guest]: was the person weaving a carpet, and they had a few of our film stars photos on the
[Guest]: looms. So Indian soft power was there. I think we have a very goods and manufacturing oriented
[Guest]: approach to life. But actually, services is becoming an extremely important part of the
[Guest]: economy. So entertainment is a very critical service. And I can well imagine that. And
[Guest]: mind you, this must have been before smartphones and so on. Because today, I mean, all these
[Guest]: kids who want to see movies, will see them on the smartphone through Netflix, and not
[Guest]: really go into a theater. So that's another factor, which you have to keep in mind.
[Amit Varma]: Another sort of question, which comes up from what you were, you know, speaking about earlier
[Amit Varma]: about the nuances between poverty and inequality, like one point I often make is that inequality
[Amit Varma]: is a sort of a Western obsession. And what is a moral imperative in India is to focus
[Amit Varma]: on poverty. And, you know, the philosopher Harry Frankfurt wrote a book called on inequality,
[Amit Varma]: where he pointed out that for him, it wasn't inequality so much per se, as what he called
[Amit Varma]: the doctrine of sufficiency, which is a moral responsibility of a state to make sure that
[Amit Varma]: each of his citizens has, you know, however you define it, a sufficient amount to sort
[Amit Varma]: of live a reasonable life. And you know, what the reform certainly did in India was that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, my friend, Nitin Pai gives a figure that for every 1% growth in GDP, 2 million
[Amit Varma]: people came out of poverty, right? And that has such moral force to me, that is, you know,
[Guest]: just so much.
[Guest]: There's no question that the removal of poverty is a should be a moral imperative. Because
[Guest]: the case for doing that is the belief that the society owes everybody a minimum standard
[Guest]: of living. And you should run your economy in such a way that nobody falls below it.
[Guest]: But that doesn't mean that inequality is not important, because inequality is relevant,
[Guest]: if you want to bring in a concept of fairness. You know, you could have a situation, for
[Guest]: example, that on the poverty front, you're doing quite well. And every year, you're taking
[Guest]: more and more guys above the poverty line. But as you know, when 70% are below the poverty
[Guest]: line, that's the most important thing. Once you get maybe 20, maybe 15, I don't know what
[Guest]: is the number correct, it depends on what poverty line you use. But if 85% of the people
[Guest]: are above the poverty line, you cannot say that how these guys, the relative outcome
[Guest]: of these guys is of no importance, because it's of importance in terms of fairness. Now
[Guest]: remember, here too, see, inequality, static inequality is one thing. But in a statically
[Guest]: unequal system, suppose you had a situation where everybody's kid sort of just gets stuck
[Guest]: in the same groove, and nobody improves. That's one thing. The other is there's a lot of churn.
[Guest]: Many people lower down and kind of move up, and some guys higher up move down. Probably
[Guest]: people will regard the second as a little bit fairer. So I think the whole concept of
[Guest]: justice and fairness is actually very complex. And I think a society always tells you what's
[Guest]: bugging it. I mean, you may get hung up on poverty, and say, look, poverty is going down.
[Guest]: So what's your problem? The fact is, in a democratic society, what people want will
[Guest]: manifest itself in their political demands. And as long as you're watching those and responding
[Guest]: to them, you won't go too wrong.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's, you know, one question I often ask people when I think about inequality and
[Amit Varma]: poverty is that where would you rather be poor today in the US or in Bangladesh? And
[Amit Varma]: of course, the answer is you'd rather be poor in the US, but the US is, you know, a far
[Amit Varma]: greater inequality than Bangladesh does, for example. So the dilemma here is that often
[Amit Varma]: these go in sort of different directions, that inequality may increase as poverty goes
[Amit Varma]: down, because everybody is getting better off, but at a different rate, where the people
[Amit Varma]: at the top are getting better off very fast, and people at the bottom are getting better
[Amit Varma]: off, but not quite as fast. So inequality kind of increases. And for a policy person,
[Amit Varma]: then that creates a dilemma, because there are trade offs involved. You know, on the
[Amit Varma]: one hand, like you say, there is a moral imperative that we have to do something about poverty.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, there is also the imperative that you might have political constituencies
[Amit Varma]: that are demanding, you know, different kinds of policies, and the two might often go in
[Amit Varma]: opposite directions. Like, it would seem to me that, and correct me if I'm wrong, that
[Amit Varma]: inequality probably went up after reforms, but I'd say poverty went down so much that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that was your immediate sort of imperative. And then as you stabilize, like
[Amit Varma]: you said, and it, you know, you then start focusing on fairness within society and all
[Amit Varma]: that. But most of the popular demands that I see from electorates in India, are really
[Amit Varma]: not about inequality. It's more about different kinds of scarcities, like lack of jobs, or
[Guest]: poverty itself, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Well, you know, these are ways in which the deficiencies surface. I mean, I would agree
[Guest]: with what you just said, that before the pandemic, it was probably true that poverty was going
[Guest]: down, no doubt about it. And inequality was probably increasing. This increase in inequality
[Guest]: is a pretty universal phenomenon around the world. So it's not just in India, it's been
[Guest]: happening elsewhere. And societies partly take care of it through taxation. I mean,
[Guest]: after all, taxation is a very powerful way of redistributing from the top to the bottom.
[Guest]: And a lot of public programs are essentially financed by taxation. So you could argue that,
[Guest]: you know, we should use the taxation instrument a little bit more effectively, that is a legitimate
[Guest]: point. But you know, I think the the issue of what's happening above the poverty line,
[Guest]: I mean, a lot of the unhappiness today, again, around the world, is that there's an incredibly
[Guest]: faster growth in the top 1%. You know, in the old days, people used to talk about the
[Guest]: top 20%. What has happened is that, for a variety of reasons, the incomes and the wealth
[Guest]: of the top 1% have really shot up. And that is causing unhappiness everywhere. Now, you
[Guest]: know, how to respond to this in a sensible manner is an open question. What do you do?
[Amit Varma]: And you one can go into that.
[Amit Varma]: Is some of it perhaps because of bad policy in the form of easy money, like I think about
[Amit Varma]: the Cantillon effect. And I'll just explain that for my listeners. And if I get it wrong,
[Amit Varma]: you can correct me because who better. But the Cantillon effect basically is that typically,
[Amit Varma]: you would imagine that say when a government prints money or money floods into the system,
[Amit Varma]: you're going to have inflation because the money supply goes up and the goods and services
[Amit Varma]: at that moment are the same. And therefore the price of everything goes up. But what
[Amit Varma]: the Cantillon effect does is that money doesn't percolate down to society at an equal rate.
[Amit Varma]: It's people at the top who get hold of it and they benefit first, while people at the
[Amit Varma]: bottom are basically having their wealth sucked away because inflation after all, is a tax
[Amit Varma]: on the poor. And therefore, you know, this easy money would therefore explain what is
[Amit Varma]: happening in say, what has happened in the past, there's normal correction, of course
[Amit Varma]: happening, but what has happened in the past with stock markets where the economy does
[Amit Varma]: really badly, but the stock market is booming. And as you mentioned, people in the top 1%
[Amit Varma]: are making a lot of money, but nobody else is really seeing the benefit of the easy money
[Amit Varma]: coming in. And that is the kind of inequality I do worry about. And it's kind of caused
[Amit Varma]: by government policy by central banks taking the easy route.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, absolutely. I mean, you know, for a long time, people used to think that monetary
[Guest]: expansion by the central banks, if it's not actually leading to inflation, shouldn't be
[Guest]: a cause of concern. In the United States, they worked out that inflation doesn't include
[Guest]: the inflation in asset prices. So it's commodity prices that are measured. If you have a huge
[Guest]: expansion of money and a credit system where actually it's only the rich that can access
[Guest]: this, and they put it all into assets, either real assets or financial assets, and assets
[Guest]: are only held by wealthy people, poor don't have assets, you can have a very big increase
[Guest]: in inequality suddenly taking place. And that I think what in the US, after the great financial
[Guest]: crash 2008, the real anger was that, you know, the economy was badly hit after the Lehman
[Guest]: brothers collapsed, output contracted, but the guys at the top were completely unaffected.
[Guest]: And even Christine Lagarde, then I think managing director of the IMF commented that nobody
[Guest]: went to jail. And yet what was going on in the financial sector was gross mismanagement,
[Guest]: very often more than mismanagement, but wrong intentioned fiddling, and no one suffered.
[Guest]: I think this has been a bit of a lesson. Anyway, it does show the other thing is that public
[Guest]: opinion now can be whipped up much easier than was the case earlier. So it's not just
[Guest]: that you're affected, but you're subjected to a great deal of social media messaging
[Guest]: on what's going wrong. So I mean, people have to be careful that the opinions of people
[Guest]: are now being driven by actors which earlier didn't have that much influence on opinion
[Amit Varma]: making. That's an extra factor. Yeah, like a friend of mine recently mentioned that he's
[Amit Varma]: never going to invest in crypto, as long as Elon Musk has the power to make prices go
[Amit Varma]: up and down with a single tweet, which kind of speaks to what you're saying about how
[Amit Varma]: you know, everybody's in the narrative battle game. Let's kind of, you know, go a little
[Amit Varma]: back in time, like, you know, one of the things that you mentioned, which I completely agree
[Amit Varma]: with about the need for greater urbanization is something that would have been frowned
[Amit Varma]: upon by economists maybe 30 years ago, or at least a sword that you would get in India.
[Amit Varma]: And also, there was the notion here, and this is still a widely held notion that our population
[Amit Varma]: is a problem, where to me, you know, people's our brains, not stomachs. Population is our
[Amit Varma]: greatest resource. And throughout history, you know, people move from the history of
[Amit Varma]: humanity is a history of migration from places with less population density to more population
[Amit Varma]: density, from villages to towns and cities. And this, this notion of population being
[Amit Varma]: one of our problems strikes me as, you know, one of those little bits of conventional wisdom
[Amit Varma]: that we kind of grew up believing and that we can now reconsider and we sort of know
[Amit Varma]: it isn't true. So, you know, in your early years, when you're getting an education first
[Amit Varma]: at Stephens, and, you know, then at Oxford, and you're learning about economics and all
[Amit Varma]: that, how much do you think the economics you learned back then is at odds with what
[Amit Varma]: we know today? Because it's very easy in the benefit of hindsight, to judge the actions
[Amit Varma]: of people back then. But I think you have to also view the actions of people back then,
[Amit Varma]: in the light of what the available knowledge was, and what the available conventional wisdom
[Amit Varma]: was. So tell me a little bit about, you know, that sort of
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, there's no question that economic perspectives have changed. You know, some
[Guest]: basic things don't change, in the sense that if you want to grow, you got to have investment.
[Guest]: But in those days, the only concern was investment. It was felt that the simplest way of having
[Guest]: investment is to expand the public sector, the government can get the resources and invest.
[Guest]: There was very little concern that the government would be a very poor investor, and would not
[Guest]: be able to ensure efficiency. So what economists call the capital output ratio would rise,
[Guest]: so you could have more investment, but with a higher capital output ratio, you wouldn't
[Guest]: get more growth. So that was the, when I was in St. Stephen's College, this was not even
[Guest]: an issue. I mean, it was just assumed that, you know, growth, the Harrod-Domar model,
[Guest]: you want higher growth, you have more investment, the government is there to do the investment,
[Guest]: why do we want the private sector? Then I think over time, the fact that the private
[Guest]: sector was much more efficient, began to be realized. And so a kind of shift took place
[Guest]: in the rest of the world. Now, you know, in the rest of the world, the shift took place
[Guest]: very early. I mean, in the 1980s, I think Reagan, Reagan in the US and Margaret Thatcher
[Guest]: in the United Kingdom kind of led this sort of anti-public sector, bring in the private
[Guest]: sector. We never did anything like that. But you know, in fact, we did it much more slowly.
[Guest]: It's possible they did it too fast. Reagan's famous comment that the nine most dangerous
[Guest]: words in the English language are, I'm from the government and I'm here to help. So created
[Guest]: an atmosphere in which the government is the problem, just shrink it. Now we, I never thought
[Guest]: that that was the right thing for India. I think the problem in India was that government
[Guest]: had to do more in certain areas, health, education, building infrastructure, especially rural
[Guest]: areas and so on. The government didn't have to do what it was otherwise trying to do.
[Guest]: Even steel, for example, we wrongly, I think, call steel infrastructure. You know, my definition
[Guest]: of infrastructure is that which is not tradable. If it's tradable, it's not infrastructure.
[Guest]: I mean, roads are infrastructure because you can't import roads. You want roads, you got
[Guest]: to build them. So you can, if you make that distinction that what you can't import is
[Guest]: infrastructure. In that case, since we're not next to any surplus electricity producing
[Guest]: nation, generation of power is infrastructure because if you don't generate it, you're not
[Guest]: going to be able to get it. But if you were a small country next to a very big country,
[Guest]: then electricity doesn't have to be infrastructure because you can buy it from a neighbor. Now,
[Guest]: I think we needed to redefine the role of government, not to scale it down. In fact,
[Guest]: by any metric, you know, like the size of total government expenditure to GDP, we are
[Guest]: too low. I mean, elsewhere in the world, people have social services, pensions, old age pension,
[Guest]: higher education, more research. A lot of the research that led to the U.S.'s dominance
[Guest]: in so many commercial areas was actually funded by the government, probably connected with
[Guest]: defense. So instead of doing these things, our government was building hotels. Now that's
[Guest]: just ridiculous. I mean, if somebody were to take a decision today to privatize every
[Guest]: single hotel owned by the government, I haven't the slightest doubt that the country would
[Guest]: be a lot better off. But if you said that publicly, you would not get much support.
[Guest]: And I think the main reason you won't get support is that those employed in the public
[Guest]: sector somehow feel that privatization will make their jobs insecure. And I think we have
[Guest]: to address that question. I mean, if the thing becomes more efficient and therefore expands,
[Guest]: more jobs will be created. But it's quite possible that they'll expect you to do some
[Guest]: work and you won't be able to just kind of sleep on the job and have an easy time. So
[Guest]: that's kind of trade off that is necessary. I think those are the changes that we needed
[Guest]: to bring in. We did start it. I don't think we did enough. But, you know, I have no hesitation
[Guest]: in saying that in 91, the reforms that were brought about were late. We should have done
[Guest]: it in the mid 80s. As a matter of fact, Rajiv Gandhi said in Parliament, and I quote that
[Guest]: in my book, I mean, he said that, look, how can we be competitive with other countries
[Guest]: if we are running systems that are 20 years out of date? But the sad thing is he wasn't
[Guest]: able to change any system. All that happened was little incremental changes. The start
[Guest]: of systemic change happened in 91. Narsimha Rao as Prime Minister, Manmohan Singh as Finance
[Guest]: Minister. Even they didn't actually get done in the first three years, all that could have
[Guest]: been done. Again, because, you know, a country that has been fed for 40 years on a certain
[Guest]: approach to policy takes a long time to change. But the good news, I think, is that when other
[Guest]: governments came in, you know, the Narsimha Rao government was succeeded by the United
[Guest]: Front government, sort of a more left oriented government, but it had Chidambaram as the
[Guest]: Finance Minister, sort of an element of continuity. The Communist Party of India was a member
[Guest]: of the government. CPM was not, but CPI was. But still, they more or less continued the
[Guest]: same strategy of the previous government. When Mr. Vajpayee formed the NDA government,
[Guest]: there was concern, look, will they continue? Because they were critical of certain aspects
[Guest]: of the policy, not other aspects, but certain aspects. But actually, the Vajpayee government
[Guest]: also continued the same thrust. So from 91, right through the end of Vajpayee government,
[Guest]: then you had the UPA, which had the same characters coming back, a long continuity of change,
[Guest]: in my view, in the right direction, but in my view, too slow. I mean, like what we did,
[Guest]: what we did over a period of 20 years, we should have done in 10 or 12. I'm not a believer
[Guest]: that we should have done it in one year or two years, but we should have done it twice
[Guest]: as fast.
[Amit Varma]: I love the way you, you know, mentioned UPA and said, which had the same characters coming
[Amit Varma]: up because you were one of those characters as well.
[Guest]: I was continuous. In the UPA, I had a, I had a political appointment, although I, I'm not
[Guest]: a politician. So I used to sit in the cabinet and observe coalition, balancing off different
[Guest]: parties and different interests and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll talk about all this in detail. And I also want to continue talking about your
[Amit Varma]: life story, but I'll take a digression. But before I take a digression, you know, you
[Amit Varma]: were speaking of about Rajiv Gandhi wanting to modernize and there's a lovely anecdote
[Amit Varma]: in your book about which is almost like a metaphor for this, where you speak about how
[Amit Varma]: Madhavrao Shindia came to him to make a presentation. And there were a lot of numbers involved,
[Amit Varma]: you know, he wanted to play around with the numbers and see what effect it would have.
[Amit Varma]: So he said, why don't you just get me a spreadsheet, right? And as you point out, this is three
[Amit Varma]: years after Lotus Notes has been released and all that. And the next day, Mr. Shindia
[Amit Varma]: and all the bureaucrats come with these actual physical spreadsheets and Rajiv is like, what
[Amit Varma]: is this? And that almost seems in a sense, metaphorical. I want to take a digression
[Amit Varma]: into talking about the state itself for a moment. Like there are two frames that I find
[Amit Varma]: useful when I think about the state. One is Francis Fukuyama's frame of thinking about
[Amit Varma]: the scope and the strength of the state, where my argument would be that in terms of scope,
[Amit Varma]: the Indian state is far bigger than it should be in the sense that it does a lot of things
[Amit Varma]: it should not like you pointed out, from running hotels to, you know, making sex toys and condoms,
[Amit Varma]: it was a company for that as well. But leaving that aside, the scope is much larger than
[Amit Varma]: it should be. But the strength is much lower than it should be. So it does a lot of things
[Amit Varma]: and it does them very badly. While what it should do is it should do a few things like
[Amit Varma]: the ones that you mentioned, you know, rule of law, public goods, all of those things
[Amit Varma]: and do them well. And we have this mismatch where both in terms of scope and strength,
[Amit Varma]: we've kind of got it completely wrong. The other frame that I find useful is James Buchanan's
[Amit Varma]: public choice theory framework, where a state on the one hand is supposed to be protective
[Amit Varma]: and productive. But the natural tendency of a state because of the incentives of the people
[Amit Varma]: within a state to accumulate power can take it to a point where it becomes predatory.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, predatory to me defines the Indian state much better than the other terms
[Amit Varma]: do when most common people on the street will kind of tell you that as well. And so one,
[Amit Varma]: what do you think of these frameworks? And two, my sense also is that most common people
[Amit Varma]: when they think of the state, they are apathetic to it, they know it is dysfunctional. They
[Amit Varma]: know it is, you know, they know that it's wrong at so many levels. But they also feel
[Amit Varma]: that abhi toh kuch nahi badlega, apna dekho, you know, and that again itself becomes an
[Amit Varma]: impediment to fundamental change, because fundamental change will only happen when there
[Amit Varma]: is a demand for it. And if people are apathetic, there won't be a demand for it.
[Guest]: No, I think this is absolutely correct. Look at education. One view is that people don't
[Guest]: care about education, but that's not actually true. I mean, even the poorest person scrounges
[Guest]: around in order to get a good education for their kids. They need not spend that much
[Guest]: money if they could make sure that the government provides good education. I think some of those
[Guest]: messages are now coming across, but it's very late in the day. You have to remember that
[Guest]: when Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru made his twist with destiny speech in 1947, that's 75 years
[Guest]: ago, more or less, the phrase he used, what are the things we should do? And he talked
[Guest]: about the age old burden of ignorance, poverty and disease. So poverty, of course, we've
[Guest]: been trying to do, and I think we've done something about it. But you know, ignorance
[Guest]: and disease, these are the, that's health, I mean, education and health. These are things
[Guest]: that the state by now, I mean, if the Indian state had done half as good a job on education
[Guest]: and disease, as it has in many other areas, we would be in much better shape. But it hasn't.
[Guest]: Now why is that? One answer, by the way, is that theoretically, neither of these is controlled
[Guest]: by the center. They're actually controlled by the states. I think part of the problem
[Guest]: is that politics at the state level does not subject the politicians to a kind of performance
[Guest]: accounting in those areas that are squarely in their hands. And I think we need to think
[Guest]: why, but the solution really is better education. I mean, if people are scrounging from their
[Guest]: meager budgets to send kids to private schools, in the belief that private schools are actually
[Guest]: better, they may not be, but that's the belief, then why don't the same people say, look,
[Guest]: make the public schools that much better. Very often, it's connected with bad systemic
[Guest]: choices. I mean, for example, for many years, in many states, state governments would not
[Guest]: allow English to be taught at a young enough age in school. And yet most people felt that
[Guest]: if you want to become employable, facility in English is helpful. Now, many people felt
[Guest]: that there were contradictions in state behavior. The local politicians will be sending their
[Guest]: kids to private schools, where they'd be learning English. But for the armed junta, they're
[Guest]: enforcing a completely different system. Now that has changed. I mean, state governments
[Guest]: now have changed so that kids are learning English at a much earlier age. But you know,
[Guest]: I think this requires, there's no substitute to states simply deciding, a, the public deciding
[Guest]: that look, we're going to judge you by what you do in this area. And states also, politicians
[Guest]: deciding that they're going to give this top priority. And that hasn't, it is beginning
[Guest]: to happen, I believe, in some states, hasn't happened enough.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, that point you make about the poorest of the poor sending their kids to
[Amit Varma]: private schools is one I keep making repeatedly, because people have this impression of private
[Amit Varma]: schools that it's all, it's for the richie richies. It's like DPS Mathura, where you
[Amit Varma]: went and that's sort of the stereotype. But the truth is that, you know, studies have
[Amit Varma]: found in Delhi, Hyderabad, Chennai, that the poorest of people, people who live in slums,
[Amit Varma]: auto drivers, domestic help, they would, instead of sending their kids to a free government
[Amit Varma]: school, they'd rather spend money that to them is a lot, but in absolute terms is not
[Amit Varma]: that much to send their kid to a budget private school, which is operating outside the ambit
[Amit Varma]: of the law and very often is illegal if you look at the kind of regulations on it, which
[Amit Varma]: is where the whole school choice movement comes from, which argues that, you know, instead
[Amit Varma]: of spending our money on schools, we should give school vouchers to parents so they can
[Amit Varma]: choose the school that kid goes to because who better than a parent to decide. And that
[Amit Varma]: at least puts the incentives in the right place that only the schools that provide quality
[Amit Varma]: can sort of survive. I had a long episode on education with the economist Karthik Mulyadharan,
[Amit Varma]: where one of the things he did point out was that you're right that private schools aren't
[Amit Varma]: necessarily better off in terms of quality of education is pretty much the same as studies
[Amit Varma]: seem to show, but they provide far more bang for the buck. And there's just a lot more
[Amit Varma]: money getting wasted per student in government schools. And people, you know, and poor parents
[Amit Varma]: just choose to spend money and vote with their feet. You know, a final sort of follow up
[Amit Varma]: question on the nature of the state in that case, that, you know, when it comes to say,
[Amit Varma]: changing economic policies and all the profound ways that you did, part of it in 91 was that
[Amit Varma]: there was a crisis, some of it you've termed as reformed by stealth. And, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: there was some gradualism also happening there. And we'll discuss all of those concepts later
[Amit Varma]: also. But now in hindsight, it seems almost like low hanging fruit when compared to the
[Amit Varma]: massive task of transforming the Indian state to reduce his scope and to increase his strength
[Amit Varma]: in the things that it should do. So, you know, you've been part of the state for, you know,
[Amit Varma]: years, you know, what is your sense of the enormity of the problem? And is it even possible
[Amit Varma]: when the incentives of the people in power will always be to not, you know, give give
[Guest]: any of it away? Well, you know, that's a good question. I mean, first point I want to make
[Guest]: is that many of my structuralist friends, when we started the liberalization, said that
[Guest]: there's no way this is going to succeed, because these ministries will never give up power.
[Guest]: But that's not what happened in 1991. I mean, we just got rid of import licensing big time.
[Guest]: And that was a huge amount of power in the Ministry of Commerce. And it was the ministry
[Guest]: itself that was willing to do that. Now, I think the intellectual atmosphere was such
[Guest]: that and we were in the middle of a crisis that faced with the crisis, the technocracy
[Guest]: at the time, and it's not just me, this would not have happened if we didn't have at least
[Guest]: five or six key players at different levels of seniority, who more or less were convinced
[Guest]: that this needs to be done. And it did lead to a change. So I remain of the view that
[Guest]: if you zero in on the key things, and you can't change the state in every dimension,
[Guest]: but if you know that for the next 10 years, this is what we're going to concentrate on,
[Guest]: I think you can. Now, to do that, by the way, at the political level, there has to be a
[Guest]: comparable perception that this is the important thing to do. And if you look at health and
[Guest]: education, these are not central government subjects, these are state government subjects.
[Guest]: So it's only if political heavyweights are put in charge of education and health, and
[Guest]: driven to perform by a chief minister who highlights these areas as the areas by which
[Guest]: he's going to be judged, and a political process that encourages the electorate to say, look,
[Guest]: these are worthwhile things to do, and we're going to do them. I don't think it's not possible.
[Guest]: It is possible. But I think we have to recognize that it won't happen in every dimension. That's
[Guest]: why we need to, in the 91 reforms, there were two or three things that we zeroed in on.
[Guest]: We want to move to a flexible exchange rate, get rid of import controls, and get rid of
[Guest]: industrial licensing, and open up to foreign direct investment. Now, this foreign direct
[Guest]: investment took a long time, because there was a lot of hesitation. But the other things
[Guest]: were done very quickly. So similarly, I think we ought to prioritize what we want, and put
[Guest]: it at the center of the political agenda. The problem is most of the crises that we
[Guest]: have, people do not link those crises to fixing these areas. I mean, nobody thinks, for example,
[Guest]: that if we can get a much better educational structure in place, much better educational
[Guest]: outcomes, then with everything else, growth rate will be higher, and employment will be
[Guest]: higher. On the other hand, the demand is give us jobs, which usually means either you do
[Guest]: some reservation, or you announce some government jobs. Nobody says, look, we need to improve
[Guest]: the quality of education. And I think there's a there's a bit of a lag lag there, which
[Guest]: we need to somehow overcome.
[Amit Varma]: So many aspects I'd like to double click on. And the first of them is about 91 itself.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I've done an episode in the 91 reforms with Shruti Rajgopalan and Ajay Shah. I spoke
[Amit Varma]: with Vinay Sitapati recently on his book on Narasimha Rao. You know, I've, you know, read
[Amit Varma]: the different books on that period, including your wonderful book. And what it strikes me
[Amit Varma]: is that there is a series of happy accidents happening there in terms of this confluence
[Amit Varma]: of remarkable policy minds and economists who happen to be coming together, and who
[Amit Varma]: happen to be building the groundwork for this to happen right from Rakesh Mohan writing
[Amit Varma]: a note in 86, your M document in 1990, people like Amarnath Verma, and, you know, Naresh
[Amit Varma]: Chandra, and later Ashok Desai joining the cabinet, you know, you being in the right
[Amit Varma]: the right place where you're in the Commerce Ministry to begin with, with Mr. Chidambaram,
[Amit Varma]: and then you shifted to the Finance Ministry. And even at a political level, you know, Narasimha
[Amit Varma]: Rao getting the job instead of say, other contenders like an ND Tiwari or any pick any
[Amit Varma]: compromise candidate like that. And you know, one of the things that Vinay Sitapati told
[Amit Varma]: me, you know, reveals in his book and talks about is that Pranab Mukherjee was angling
[Amit Varma]: for the post of Finance Minister, because he had supported Narasimha Rao for the presidentship
[Amit Varma]: of the Congress Party after Mr. Gandhi's assassination. And somehow, because of the cabinet note that
[Amit Varma]: he got from Naresh Chandra, you know, off the bat, Mr. Rao realized that this is a crisis.
[Amit Varma]: And this is not a time to mess around, we need the right people for the job. And he
[Amit Varma]: initially offered the Finance Ministry to IG Patel, who was in at LSE, and he said no,
[Amit Varma]: and then he offered it to Manmohan. And then this remarkable team comes together. And all
[Amit Varma]: of this happens. So the question here is that, you know, in hindsight, what has happened
[Amit Varma]: seems inevitable. But to me, it seems like like, my God, we are so lucky that this and
[Amit Varma]: I'm not trying to flatter you. But just in terms of where my own life is, I feel lucky
[Amit Varma]: that this group of people was there at the right time at the right place. Is there a
[Amit Varma]: counterfactual to this, where, you know, you change just one figure in all of this, and
[Amit Varma]: like dominoes, it just doesn't kind of work out?
[Guest]: That's a good question. I mean, look, I agree with you that I think Narasimha Rao understood,
[Guest]: he was not so wedded to the by then frayed, old Congress kind of perception of ideology.
[Guest]: Pranam Mukherjee was much more firmly in that camp. Narasimha Rao, no, I think he was aware
[Guest]: of what was happening in the world. I think we are fortunate that he chose a finance minister,
[Guest]: who probably had more credibility internationally than anyone else could, and who had thought
[Guest]: about these things and was also aware that big changes are needed. Given the finance
[Guest]: minister and the close relationship between the prime minister and the finance minister,
[Guest]: the team that was then put together, you can credit it to Manmohan himself, they're always
[Guest]: good people in the system. I mean, if a message went around that, look, we want the kind of
[Guest]: guys who will help us do A rather than B. But you've got to be clear that it is A rather
[Guest]: than B. Just a broad statement of we want some good people doesn't help. That part is
[Guest]: not difficult. But yes, how do you get a political outcome where the two or three key people
[Guest]: at the political top pointed firmly in a particular direction? I agree that the crisis concentrates
[Guest]: the mind very substantially. And I think both Narsimha Rao and Manmohan Singh had to show
[Guest]: that whatever they were doing, was bringing the crisis under control, which they did.
[Guest]: But I don't think it was just controlling the crisis that constituted the reform. The
[Guest]: lucky thing is that they, they saw this as an opportunity, both to bring the crisis under
[Guest]: control and to bring about economic reforms, which would change the longer term growth
[Guest]: process. I mean, the crisis would have been brought under control, even if the reforms
[Guest]: hadn't happened. So I think crisis itself, but it was a, it was an opportunity to bring
[Guest]: in something. We need to, we need situations like that. But you know, in the end, what
[Guest]: it really means is that governments have to be very clear that their performance is going
[Guest]: to be judged on the basis of performance in key areas. And as long as that is known, they
[Guest]: will know whether they're performing well or not performing well. I mean, you can fudge
[Guest]: things here and there, but not for too long.
[Amit Varma]: So three things I want to double click on. And one of them is this, my good friend Ajay
[Amit Varma]: Shah, who's been on the show many times, and you obviously know him, has lamented to me
[Amit Varma]: that back in those days, the late 80s and 90s, all the way through, you know, you talk
[Amit Varma]: about the continuity through government. So all the way through the end of Vajpayee's
[Amit Varma]: regime, then all the way through UPA, you had this cadre of people who believed in reforms
[Amit Varma]: and good economics and good policy, who were sincere, who were kind of working hard. And
[Amit Varma]: his sense is that in a sense, that is, I don't know what's the right word for it, perhaps,
[Amit Varma]: that's gotten dissipated away, that he worries that, you know, you mentioned that there are
[Amit Varma]: always a few good people in the system. And his worry is that there may not be that many
[Amit Varma]: good people in the system anymore, people just think differently, and so on and so forth,
[Amit Varma]: that there is that tradition that comes down from people like yourself and Vijay Kelkar,
[Amit Varma]: who co-wrote that book with Ajay. And that tradition is kind of dying out. And that's
[Amit Varma]: sort of...
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, it's always nice to think that one's period was the best. And you know, you
[Guest]: shouldn't even mind thinking that. But I would make one or two other points. One is, it was
[Guest]: relatively easy for us, given the state of play at that time. What was conventional wisdom?
[Guest]: At that time, it was very clear. That's not so today. Because let's face it, if you read
[Guest]: almost anything, people are bemoaning the fact that the old consensus appears to have
[Guest]: frayed, de-globalization, the economists call it slobalization. We're not in a world at
[Guest]: the moment where it's very clear what is the right way to go. This makes it more challenging.
[Guest]: This means that in a way, you need to look at what's happening and then decide what is
[Guest]: it that you want to do. I mean, take an extreme case. Many people are beginning to think that
[Guest]: maybe since the rest of the world is fracturing, India should not be pursuing an open strategy.
[Guest]: And maybe if the United States is kind of shrinking, maybe we should also shrink. You
[Guest]: can argue against that, by the way. I mean, we are pretty small potatoes when it comes
[Guest]: to the global economy. You could argue that in a world which is fracturing, and in which
[Guest]: the big powers seem to be looking inwards, we may well have an opportunity to cash in,
[Guest]: because although they are looking inwards, none of them is going completely isolated.
[Guest]: In a world where China is somehow being shunned, and people are suspicious of China, it creates
[Guest]: a space for us. Because people are ultimately going, it's not that people are going to sort
[Guest]: of reject China, as a lot of people say, it's going to be China plus one. In other words,
[Guest]: they want to balance off the risks. Don't just put all your eggs in one basket, have
[Guest]: another one. India could be another one. So you've got to be clear, what is the strategy
[Guest]: you're following? If the lesson you learn is that the rest of the world is shrinking,
[Guest]: therefore, we should shrink, then you go in one direction. If the lesson you learn is
[Guest]: the rest of the world is shrinking, and is doing it in a manner which creates opportunities
[Guest]: for us, we should not be doing that. But we should be seeing how we can integrate with
[Guest]: whichever part of the world it's easier to integrate with. I would certainly say that
[Guest]: that should be our approach. But this is a strategic choice. In 1991, that choice was
[Guest]: very clear. Because the Soviet Union collapsed, all the inward looking stuff wasn't working.
[Guest]: And there was only one way to go. I personally think we should still remain open. But I think
[Guest]: we have to build an adequate understanding because there are people who say this is just
[Guest]: the old stuff. You're parroting and it's no longer valid.
[Amit Varma]: So my the second of those three questions kind of comes from what you just said that
[Amit Varma]: in terms of that now it's still a live debate, it's no longer so obvious which direction
[Amit Varma]: should we go in, though I completely agree with you, I am all for openness and free trade
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. But the question here is this that earlier you spoke about how politicians
[Amit Varma]: should be clear that they will be judged on their performance in certain areas. But I
[Amit Varma]: would argue that if you look at the model, if you look at the current times, that that
[Amit Varma]: link between governance and accountability has broken down in the sense that politicians
[Amit Varma]: seem to have realized and perhaps this was true all along to some extent or the other,
[Amit Varma]: that you know, that governance and electability are two completely different things that the
[Amit Varma]: whole game today seems to be a battle of narratives, that governance doesn't really matter so much
[Amit Varma]: people are apathetic anyway, it's a question of what narratives can you build and in what
[Amit Varma]: direction you can take them. And when you ally this with the notion that a politician's
[Amit Varma]: imperative is not necessarily to do a deep seated reform that will help the country 15
[Amit Varma]: years later, but to do because his election cycle is five years or in the case of parties
[Amit Varma]: as always some election or the other around the corner. So their incentives are really
[Amit Varma]: to do things which are short term and visible, and maybe band aids at best and not fundamental
[Amit Varma]: reform. The classic example being that now it's become the rigor for parties to offer
[Amit Varma]: farm loan waivers in elections. And in times of deep distress, farm loan waivers may be
[Amit Varma]: a necessary anesthetic, but they are nowhere close to the sort of structural reforms we
[Amit Varma]: actually need and which you've written about so much in your book as well as one of those
[Amit Varma]: areas where we which was much harder to tackle than the other areas. So given political incentives
[Amit Varma]: and from these political incentives would then come the incentives of the bureaucrats
[Amit Varma]: and the policy people within an administration. Because today, what seems to be happening
[Amit Varma]: is that you have a situation where our current Prime Minister has closed himself off to any
[Amit Varma]: criticism. And therefore people, the people he's gathered around him are people who will
[Amit Varma]: only tell him what he wants to hear. And what he wants to hear will be extremely limited,
[Amit Varma]: because his worldview itself is so limited. I don't want to put you into a situation to
[Amit Varma]: have to comment on politics, because I don't want to, you know, go into that awkward space.
[Amit Varma]: But just in terms of structurally how it works out, if you look at the incentives of everyone,
[Amit Varma]: suddenly there seem to be no incentives to actually do the kind of deep rooted reforms
[Amit Varma]: that are still left. And to, you know, to orient India in these directions that you
[Amit Varma]: mentioned towards openness towards continuing with globalization, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your sense of this?
[Guest]: Well, of course, I don't know. I don't know what the situation is like inside government
[Guest]: now. But you know, I, I mean, I would not say I wouldn't, I agree with you, by the way,
[Guest]: that all over the world, the political battle is now being fought on competing narratives.
[Guest]: That's fine. But the competing narratives are not anchored on economic performance,
[Guest]: not just in India, but everywhere. And I think we just have to live with that. But I firmly
[Guest]: believe that in a country like India, you cannot divorce yourself from the economic
[Guest]: narrative. I mean, whatever narrative you spin, if the economics doesn't live up to
[Guest]: it, I don't think that'll work. Nor is the government actually saying that. I mean, for
[Guest]: example, they're talking about, you know, we are going to have doubling, tripling the
[Guest]: GDP, reaching 5 trillion, 10 trillion. Now, sooner or later, somebody is going to ask,
[Guest]: is it happening? And I think if you set your mind to asking that question, somebody must
[Guest]: be saying, look, this is an important part of our narrative, so we better do something
[Guest]: about it. In many areas, for example, there is a very strong assertion that we're going
[Guest]: to do different things. I mean, for example, on privatization, the official position is
[Guest]: that we are going to privatize a few banks. Well, I mean, they've got delayed. Are they
[Guest]: going to be just completely forgotten? Will something happen? We have to wait and see.
[Guest]: So I see around the big narratives, many economic, if you like, touch points, which somehow or
[Guest]: the other, I think the political system will have to refer to saying, look, we said we'll
[Guest]: do this and we've done it. And I think if you do that, then sooner or later, they'll
[Guest]: have to work out how to get it done.
[Amit Varma]: I did an episode a few months ago with Shivam Shankar Singh, who worked in the BJP for a
[Amit Varma]: while and then left and wrote a book about campaign politics and all that. And he told
[Amit Varma]: me and he also, you know, worked with Prashant Kishore in the election of Amarinder Singh.
[Amit Varma]: So he's worked across parties. But he told me about when he decided to leave the BJP.
[Amit Varma]: And he said it was the day sometimes well before the 2019 election. So I'm guessing
[Amit Varma]: it must be 2018 or 2017, where he realized that the plank of the party was going to be
[Amit Varma]: about divisiveness, about social issues, rather than economics. And when he asked why he was
[Amit Varma]: told that, listen, we made a bunch of promises in 2014. We did that on economics. If we now
[Amit Varma]: continue with economics, they will ask us what happened to all those promises. So we
[Amit Varma]: are going to turn away from that. And we are going to instead turn away and talk about
[Amit Varma]: Mandir, for example, and talk about those kinds of social issues, not literally Mandir,
[Amit Varma]: but you know, I'm using it as a metaphor in turn away towards that, and use that instead.
[Amit Varma]: And my sense is that it's, it's not that hard to do that, like after demonetization happened,
[Amit Varma]: which I think was the largest assault on property rights in human history, when you see the
[Amit Varma]: number of people who got affected, and I thought they will get hammered in UP, but they won
[Amit Varma]: comprehensively. And part of it, of course, could be from the schadenfreude that people
[Amit Varma]: felt that, you know, others better off the ladder, their perception was that they have
[Amit Varma]: also suffered, though that was not so much the case. But I'm a little sort of skeptical
[Amit Varma]: about how much economics is really a part of people's consciousness in this aspect.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you you pointed out in your book about how, when you were in the US working for the
[Amit Varma]: IMF around 2003 2004, when that election came about, from a distance, it seemed to you that
[Amit Varma]: the India shining campaign would work. And and then it didn't. And and and the watch
[Amit Varma]: by government, like you pointed out, there was a solid continuity on economics, they
[Amit Varma]: did good things. You know, it was a reformist government, they made progress, we were moving
[Amit Varma]: forward, and yet they lost. So it didn't help them in the election. So what's, you know,
[Guest]: well, I mean, you know, obviously, as an economist, I like to think that somehow or the other
[Guest]: politics will ultimately come around to recognizing that whatever narrative you want to spin,
[Guest]: you can spin that narrative better, if it's on the strength of good economic performance,
[Guest]: rather than bad economic performance. And you know, for a country of our scale and size,
[Guest]: I remain of the view that the narrative will matter. And therefore moving ahead, people
[Guest]: will look at that look, the biggest thing right now, I guess, inflation is a huge problem
[Guest]: currently, I'm sure that people are not thinking that inflation doesn't matter, we'll just
[Guest]: spin a narrative. I think longer term employment is a big problem. We're not getting nearly
[Guest]: the kind of employment growth that we would like to have. Now, I don't know, most people
[Guest]: would say that if we can achieve the kind of growth rate, which the government is currently
[Guest]: talking about for the current year, and maybe the year after, it will reflect itself in
[Guest]: the employment situation. And if that happens, they'll be able to spin that as a narrative.
[Guest]: Now, this makes it important to get that kind of growth. I mean, if we don't get that kind
[Guest]: of growth, there's no way that the employment situation can be spun out at all. It's possible
[Guest]: that economic deterioration doesn't occupy the center stage of political debate. Because
[Guest]: if economics is not going well, you can always debate something else. But as the underpinning
[Guest]: of what determines the way politics moves, being an economist, I like to think that economics
[Guest]: matters. And I would therefore think that any government, whatever narrative they want
[Guest]: to spin, would be aware that it's a lot easier to spin that narrative if you've got a solid
[Guest]: economic story to tell. And they are telling that story. So it's not as if economic stories
[Guest]: are being forgotten. It's just that we have to wait and see what they look like a year
[Guest]: from now, or maybe two years from now.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough. I guess, you know, where you sit, you can see the longer span of history.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes it's easy to kind of get into the current moment and feel disheartened or depressed
[Amit Varma]: at the way things are. But I guess if you just take a few steps back, and you see the
[Amit Varma]: longer arc, then perhaps there's reason for hope. Let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And at the other end of the break, we'll continue chatting. And I want to go back to your fascinating
[Amit Varma]: life story and to the teenage Montek Singhaluwali, if I may.
[Amit Varma]: Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of you first
[Amit Varma]: heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009, and
[Amit Varma]: became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day, and was forced
[Amit Varma]: to think about many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well,
[Amit Varma]: that phase in my life ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now
[Amit Varma]: I'm doing it through a newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com,
[Amit Varma]: where I will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of
[Amit Varma]: the themes I cover in this podcast, and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: and subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land
[Amit Varma]: up in your email inbox, you don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you. Welcome back to the scene in the
[Amit Varma]: unseen. I'm chatting with Montek Singh Aluwalia. And we're going back now to the 1960s. And
[Amit Varma]: to your time in Stephens, which was very interesting because you know, one has a public image of
[Amit Varma]: you as someone who's a serious, stern economist, and so on and so forth. And at Stephens, you
[Amit Varma]: are just doing so much like on the one hand, you've pointed out about how you know, right
[Amit Varma]: from the time you, you know, you were in DPS, you were doing really well in studies and
[Amit Varma]: how that kind of came from your dad, the importance and you must have, you know, imbibed by osmosis.
[Amit Varma]: But you're also very active in extracurricular activities, you're debating in Delhi quite
[Amit Varma]: actively, you later, you know, continued in Oxford and became part of the debating club
[Amit Varma]: there. And you described the two magazines in Stephens, and one is a Stephanian, which
[Amit Varma]: you describe as, quote, ponderous and somewhat pretentious, stop quote, but the one that
[Amit Varma]: you enjoyed, you edited both, but the one that you enjoyed working with was one called
[Amit Varma]: cooler talk and the cooler with a K. And remember, this is the 1960s. So it's such a cool name,
[Amit Varma]: especially back then, where you write cool quote, cooler talk had a snappy style and
[Amit Varma]: carried short pieces on current student life and events with irreverent comments on prominent
[Amit Varma]: students. We were careful to steer clear of criticizing the college authorities, but disparaging
[Amit Varma]: remarks about the food were tolerated, stop quote, and so on and so forth. So paint me
[Amit Varma]: a picture of, you know, who the young one take is at that time that on the one hand,
[Amit Varma]: it seems that he's a party person. And he's like doing all of these things. He's debating,
[Amit Varma]: he's running magazine, he's taking the mickey out of people. And at the same time, doing
[Amit Varma]: exceptionally well in studies, to the point that you eventually just get the Rhodes Scholarship.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, your academic life, if one looks at it is just absolutely stellar. So tell
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit about that. What kind of person are you? What's what's having fun for you
[Amit Varma]: in those days? Like today, a modern kid, you'll have your own idea of fun. But what do you
[Amit Varma]: actually do? What is the texture of a typical day when you're in college in St. Stephens?
[Amit Varma]: What's happening all day?
[Guest]: Well, you know, one important thing is that the things I was interested in, both debating
[Guest]: and cooler talk didn't take up that much time. I mean, you know, if you were interested in
[Guest]: theater, it would take up a lot of your time. If you were interested in sports, it would
[Guest]: take up a lot of your time. But if you're doing the school magazine and debating, I
[Guest]: mean, if you know how to speak, etc, it doesn't take much time to do that stuff. So I don't
[Guest]: think these were conflicting things. But I did actually genuinely enjoy both cooler talk
[Guest]: and debating because, you know, I was a residential scholar. So really, once the college teaching
[Guest]: periods are over, you've got the whole day to spend. And a small group of people that
[Guest]: you're constantly with, it helps to be involved with them in extracurricular activity. You
[Guest]: know, those who did theater would just spend hours rehearsing. In our case, we just met
[Guest]: at the college cooler, chatted a bit and said, Why don't you write on this? And I'll write
[Guest]: on that. And you went off and did something. So it was actually quite, it was cool to use
[Guest]: the correct word.
[Amit Varma]: You make it sound so easy. And what was and you've also kind of spoken about how there
[Amit Varma]: was there was discourse happening there. Like you point out at one point how you called
[Amit Varma]: Meenu Masani and Meenu Masani came and gave a talk and because so much of his talk was
[Amit Varma]: so against the conventional leftist wisdom of the time, that people started protesting
[Amit Varma]: and he said, Don't worry, I'm going to come back, I'm going to debate with you. And then
[Amit Varma]: when he does come back, the person debating him is Mr. Arun Shourie, who is then, you
[Amit Varma]: know, a man of the left as it were. And that's such a fascinating picture, a young Arun Shourie
[Amit Varma]: from the left debating Meenu Masani and you're getting to hear that kind of mind speak. Tell
[Amit Varma]: me a little bit about then how your view of the world begins to form in terms of worldviews,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that initially, I guess it is so restricted because you don't have the internet,
[Amit Varma]: all the knowledge of the world is not available to you, what you have is in your syllabus
[Amit Varma]: and the available conventional wisdom about you, around you, you know, people like Hayek
[Amit Varma]: and Friedman are active, but you are not reading their works at that point in time in the,
[Amit Varma]: you know, 50s and 60s. So how does your worldview begin to form at that stage? And how does
[Amit Varma]: it then evolve when you move on to Oxford?
[Guest]: Well, I think these speakers that we used to get, they would come after dinner. And
[Guest]: again, this was only the residential scholars who benefited from it. But it was a nice window
[Guest]: to the outside world, where people would say things that are a little unconventional. And
[Guest]: in a way that reflects the fact that our courses were really quite boring. I mean, I think
[Guest]: I mentioned at some point that, you know, we were aware or rather our teachers were
[Guest]: aware that the issue that planning is always good, it was not uncontroversial. I mean,
[Guest]: there were people who had different views, but we were never taught that at all. It would
[Guest]: have been so much more exciting if they had said, well, you know, even if they could have
[Guest]: said, look, the consensus view is that this is the way to go. But you know, it has this
[Guest]: problem. And you guys think about it and make up your own mind. No, I mean, planning was
[Guest]: good. Raising investment was good. Public sector was good. It was just a undifferentiated
[Guest]: mass of information thrown at you. And these after dinner speakers, therefore, were a breath
[Guest]: of fresh air. And the students had organized that. It wasn't organized by the college.
[Guest]: And they would invite well known people to some extent, I guess, since Stevens had a
[Guest]: kind of a reputation as an elite college. So these guys would also come. And I thought
[Guest]: it was terrific. And I'm totally convinced that people at that young age should be subjected
[Guest]: to different views. I mean, they should be told that, look, this is a conventional view,
[Guest]: but there is another view. You can, if you like, indicate to them that some of these
[Guest]: other views are a little weird, but let them explore it. And I would say from that point
[Guest]: of view, one of the marked differences between going to Oxford and being in St. Stevens was
[Guest]: that in St. Stevens, the formal teaching did not encourage you to explore these alternatives.
[Guest]: It was almost as if, you know, the old joke used to be, the guys who took the IAS exam
[Guest]: in history, that there were seven causes for the decline of the Mughal Empire. And you
[Guest]: had to say them in the right sequence, where there was no effort to say, well, you know,
[Guest]: there are different views you can take on this, and God knows which one is right. And
[Guest]: I wish we had had more of that in our formal education.
[Amit Varma]: So how was Oxford renewed, of course, did the PPE, which is, you know, people say that
[Amit Varma]: all the politicians of England are basically people from that small set of elites who do
[Amit Varma]: the PPE at Oxford and Cambridge and so on. And how was that? Because obviously, the environment
[Amit Varma]: there is completely different. You're not mugging up seven causes of the fall of the
[Amit Varma]: Roman Empire, you're actually encouraged to think about stuff. And I will just, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you've, you've named a few people who gave lectures to you at the time, like Hook Trevor
[Amit Varma]: Roper, and one of my heroes, Isaiah Berlin, you know, just would have been so mind boggling
[Amit Varma]: for me to actually be physically present at a lecture by him. So what was that like? Because
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me that it must have been really mind expanding. And how are you, how do you
[Amit Varma]: then begin to get shaped into, you know, looking at the world in the way that you know, I think
[Guest]: that was extremely mind expanding. I mean, one simple thing was that, you know, you didn't
[Guest]: have to go to any particular lecture. I mean, there were a whole bunch of lectures, and
[Guest]: there was a course, and you had tutorials, you could technically do your exam, based
[Guest]: on your tutorial work, and go to a completely different set of lectures. It wasn't the case
[Guest]: that you're doing PPE, how come you're listening to a historian. And I think that was a terrific
[Guest]: degree of flexibility. It's not that one used it all the time. But you know, the very fact
[Guest]: that you, you could choose whose lecture you wanted to, even in economics. I mean, for
[Guest]: example, John Hicks was one of the people who lectured, possibly the worst lecturer
[Guest]: in the world. You know, I mean, he would stutter, stumble, but you just wanted to hear the great
[Guest]: man. And you went there. Of course, you read his book separately. And I think I enjoyed
[Guest]: the academic side of Oxford quite a bit. In fact, my only regret in a way, is that I didn't
[Guest]: do enough didn't take philosophy very seriously. I mean, I sort of slightly resented the fact
[Guest]: that I had to do P, P and E. I didn't mind the politics because I was interesting. But
[Guest]: I think when I think back on it, if I had paid more attention to philosophy, I might
[Guest]: have had a better analytical understanding of how one thinks than I do today. But I was
[Guest]: very much into, you know, let's get the useful stuff like economics and philosophy is neither
[Amit Varma]: here nor there.
[Amit Varma]: And who are the people who had the most influence on you in terms of the kind of thinkers ever
[Amit Varma]: and perhaps in terms of shaping the way that you think?
[Amit Varma]: You mean in Oxford?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, or even during that period? I mean, I imagine whenever, you know, you feel you're
[Guest]: being formed in a sense?
[Guest]: Well, mostly it was in the areas of development economics. I think one of the influential
[Guest]: people in Oxford at the time was Ian Little, as he done a lot of this project analysis
[Guest]: and how do you actually decide that a particular project is good. And I thought that he raised
[Guest]: some extremely interesting things, which we should have been taught about much more than
[Guest]: we were earlier. And, you know, it led you to question the value of a lot of what you're
[Guest]: doing. For example, one of the simplest things he said was that when you value a project,
[Guest]: you should value everything at world prices. So if you're a steelmaking company, and you're
[Guest]: taking iron ore and producing steel, the value you're adding is the international value of
[Guest]: the iron ore subtracted from the international value of the steel. And actually, when you
[Guest]: did it that way, you found that a lot of the Indian steelmaking companies were extremely
[Guest]: inefficient. They were just good iron ore manufacturing companies. The value they added
[Guest]: at international prices was actually very low. And had they paid themselves, paid for
[Guest]: the iron ore, what the iron ore would have commanded in world markets, they'd all be
[Guest]: making losses. So it's an interesting way of thinking about, you know, what is a productive
[Guest]: enterprise as opposed to an unproductive enterprise. And Ian was one. There was a lot of work going
[Guest]: on at the time in Latin America. You know, why is Latin America? Latin America was, at
[Guest]: that time, ahead of Asia in terms of development. And many of the ideas that later on were seen
[Guest]: as traditional development ideas came out of Latin America. Raoul Prebysch and people
[Guest]: like that. That, you know, basically the terms of trade are rigged against you. And you shouldn't
[Guest]: be, therefore, trying to export primary commodities. You should always be adding value. And that
[Guest]: led naturally to protecting manufacturing, which is in a way what the United States had
[Guest]: done earlier. So historically, I mean, countries have tried that and done well. And the Latinos
[Guest]: were saying, this is what we should be doing also. It's a very influential set of ideas
[Guest]: in economics. And, you know, I think the whole notion of development consisting of people
[Guest]: moving from low productivity occupations to high productivity, sort of the Arthur Lewis
[Guest]: type moving from agriculture to industry. So how do you create an environment which
[Guest]: facilitates that move? That was, I think, one of the interesting things. And, you know,
[Guest]: around that time, there was a lot of very negative thinking about Indian agriculture.
[Guest]: Lots of people saying that, you know, India will never be able to feed herself. It's a
[Guest]: club of Rome type of people, which proved to be comprehensively wrong. So it's nice
[Guest]: when you go back. It's not everything that's fashionable at the time that in retrospect
[Guest]: proves to be right. So I think those are some of the big, big things that I can recall of
[Guest]: hand.
[Amit Varma]: Sanyam Bhutani And do you recall any lightbulb moments where
[Amit Varma]: something happens or you read something or you listen to a lecture, and the way that
[Amit Varma]: you look at a particular thing changes completely. Like a lightbulb moment for many people that
[Amit Varma]: I come across is often that first moment where they realize the positive sumness of things,
[Amit Varma]: and you immediately realize why markets are great and why trade is great and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Or for me personally, a lightbulb moment is understanding spontaneous order, you know,
[Amit Varma]: how languages and societies and economies and so all can function that you don't need
[Amit Varma]: a top down benevolent dictator, so to say, but the price system can work and coordinate
[Amit Varma]: all of that within the economy. So do you remember any lightbulb moments like that,
[Amit Varma]: where suddenly, you just see the world in a better way?
[Guest]: Dr. Raghuram G. Rajan That's a tough one. My guess is that for
[Guest]: the period I was in Oxford, I think some of the ideas that Ian Little was working on,
[Guest]: that which are closely related to the importance of keeping an economy open, and not just valuing
[Guest]: things according to artificially high values, resulting from excessive protection. I thought
[Guest]: that was a bit of a lightbulb moment, because it was a way of thinking that had not been
[Guest]: I'd not been exposed to at all. You know, at that time, the conventional view used to
[Guest]: be that look, foreign exchange is very important. So you should have a shadow price on foreign
[Guest]: exchange. This is a different way of saying the same thing. The issue is not that foreign
[Guest]: exchange, but world prices are very important. And you should you should see what value you're
[Guest]: adding measured at world prices. And I think that stayed with me. And I saw its importance
[Guest]: in many, many other areas also linked to that was, and this was probably a little after
[Guest]: I had left Oxford, a kind of a realization that Southeast Asia was actually doing incredibly
[Guest]: well. You know, that wasn't the case in the early 60s. But for a while, it was mainly
[Guest]: the Gang of Four, etc. But then during the 70s, it was very clear that our performance
[Guest]: was deteriorating. I'd left Oxford by then, our performance was deteriorating, whereas
[Guest]: the Southeast Asia, East Asian, Southeast Asian countries were actually improving. And
[Guest]: that's that was something that had, to me, a very important signal of something wrong
[Guest]: in our policies. And later on, therefore, I was very inclined to believe that the excessive
[Guest]: protection and so on that we were locked into was actually the source of the problem. And
[Guest]: the interesting thing is that, you know, Jagdish Bhagwati and Padma Desai in their book documented
[Guest]: this very extensively. And it's interesting that I mean, the book was written after they
[Guest]: left India. But you know, somehow it did not have the impact in India that it should have
[Guest]: had. I mean, it's only in 1991 that some of those ideas got reflected in policy.
[Amit Varma]: I discovered an interesting phrase a couple of years back, which, you know, explains a
[Amit Varma]: lot of things which are wrong with how we often think about the world and the phrases
[Amit Varma]: isomorphic mimicry. I did an episode on this with Alex Tabarrok and Shruthi Rajgopalan
[Amit Varma]: where which was in the particular context of policymakers will take a policy that is
[Amit Varma]: working somewhere else in the world transplanted to India and it obviously won't work because
[Amit Varma]: local conditions are completely different. And conceptually, if I take a step back and
[Amit Varma]: apply to other things, I think it can be true of so many things. So during the time that
[Amit Varma]: you was first studying at Oxford, then, you know, working at the World Bank and so on
[Amit Varma]: during that entire period of time, were there times where you encountered something in theory?
[Amit Varma]: And you said that, wait a minute, the Indian reality is a little complex, it may not quite
[Amit Varma]: fit there, you know, in terms of, I think, people who study the world and then actually
[Amit Varma]: get down to it to interact with it and do things in it, often find that there is that
[Amit Varma]: gap they have to bridge between the theory and the practice and the theory, the verified
[Amit Varma]: level of ideas, you know, is one thing. But when you get down and dirty, there's just
[Amit Varma]: so much else that you have to do, like one of the really interesting aspects of your
[Amit Varma]: book, which I was taking notes on are the many points you made about how the imperatives
[Amit Varma]: of policy in India, which are so, you know, unique and local, and you have to take so
[Amit Varma]: much into account, which you will not find mentioned in the textbooks, as well. So what
[Amit Varma]: was that like, like, were there areas where something that you've learned, when does it
[Amit Varma]: begin to clash with the real world? Is it when you're working at the World Bank after
[Amit Varma]: Oxford? Or, you know, do you read something from a book and think about, okay, let me
[Amit Varma]: place that in the Indian context and try to think for myself. So, you know, tell me a
[Guest]: little bit about that sort of,
[Guest]: I think it's actually very important. You know, I don't like to think of distinguishing
[Guest]: between theory and as rarefied and reality, because rarefied theory only sort of spells
[Guest]: out what are the constraints under which the system works. If you're going to apply that
[Guest]: somewhere, you ought to think about whether those conditions hold and if they don't hold,
[Guest]: it's not going to work. But you know, my feeling is that you really only perceive that when
[Guest]: you're actually working in your own country on policymaking, even in the World Bank, after
[Guest]: all, you're, you're observing from outside, you're visiting very briefly, and your interaction
[Guest]: with governments is not necessarily one in which they're telling you exactly what they
[Guest]: think. So I think the point's very important. Everybody should be, should think, when they're
[Guest]: trying to apply something, that in theory, this works, because if you do A, then somebody
[Guest]: else will do B, and that'll lead to reaction C. And is that going to happen in this particular
[Guest]: situation? I think that I began to see those kinds of things only when I was in government.
[Guest]: I don't think the World Bank, I mean, in the World Bank, you read about these things, but
[Guest]: you don't actually see it. I mean, I'll give you a simple example. You know, in those days,
[Guest]: you had this completely ridiculous system, where if you wanted to produce something,
[Guest]: and you needed some import, you had to get the import cleared from what was called the
[Guest]: indigenous angle, and also the essentiality angle. So essentiality angle meant, do you
[Guest]: really need it? And the indigenous angle meant, why can't you just get it domestically? I
[Guest]: remember in a licensing committee meeting, there was some guy who wanted to produce electric
[Guest]: irons. I can't remember whether I mentioned it in the book. And you know, what he said
[Guest]: was that, look, I want to make an electric iron, and I need to import steel of a certain
[Guest]: thickness. And Indian steel is not that thin. It just has to be one grade thicker. And that's
[Guest]: not suitable for an electric iron. And around the committee, the guys from the steel ministry
[Guest]: said this is all nonsense. You know, I mean, perfectly okay, iron will be a little heavy.
[Guest]: It struck me that, you know, this is why we never got producers who could actually produce
[Guest]: up to the quality they themselves wanted. Because here was a guy who actually said,
[Guest]: look, this is what I want to do. And I want to produce an electric iron that looks competitive.
[Guest]: And I need thin steel sheets of this thickness. And the government fellows said, no, what
[Guest]: does it matter if it's thicker? End result, he's produced an iron, but he'll never be
[Guest]: able to sell it. Because if that's the kind of iron he's producing, somebody wants to
[Guest]: look around who's a good manufacturer, they would just say, look, this is all clunky stuff.
[Guest]: I mean, he was producing the ambassador of irons in a way. And since we were doing that
[Guest]: to cars, it's not surprising that we were doing to irons too. You know, I mentioned
[Guest]: this in the paper that when Maruti came along, and Maruti sort of had agreed that they would
[Guest]: indigenize at a certain pace. So at one point, they were importing the engines, and then
[Guest]: they had to sort of machine the engine block domestically, for which they needed machine
[Guest]: tools. So sure enough, they said, look, this is the kind of fineness we want. And they'll
[Guest]: have to be imported from Japan. The local DGTD, as it used to be called, Directorate
[Guest]: General of Technical Development, they said, no, we don't need to import this because
[Guest]: HMT produces machine tools. And HMT was asked, and of course, we can produce it. And they
[Guest]: were asked, have you produced anything of this sophistication? I said, no, but we are
[Guest]: doing it for the Bajaj scooters. And the Maruti chaps pointed out that the engine of a scooter
[Guest]: is very different from the engine of a car. And to make the point, Bhargav, who was then
[Guest]: the MD there, he actually got the two engines brought into the minister's office to show
[Guest]: him that, look, this is the engine these guys produce. This is the engine we need. They
[Guest]: can machine this one, but they can't machine this one at all. Now, I would have thought
[Guest]: that this shouldn't have been necessary. And you realize then that, you know, while it's
[Guest]: very easy to say, we will only allow the import of what is really essential, in the end, it's
[Guest]: a highly arbitrary decision, and quality suffers. And Maruti were just very keen. Krishnamurti
[Guest]: was then the head of Maruti, was very particular, that there should be no decline in quality,
[Guest]: because we started producing the engine block domestically. And he said that, look, I'm
[Guest]: trying to be responsible for the quality of the Maruti. Don't kind of get me stuck with
[Guest]: a machine tool, which doesn't make sense to me. Whereas in the system, the tendency would
[Guest]: have been to do that. And I think this is an example of, you know, why you need to be
[Guest]: open, why producers must be given the choice. Because, you know, if producers are not given
[Guest]: the choice, they're not responsible for the end result. The moment you force the guy to
[Guest]: buy a different machine tool from what he wanted, he can blame non-performance to the
[Guest]: fact that you didn't let me get what I wanted. So it creates a culture that just is not consistent
[Guest]: with producing good quality. And, you know, several meetings that I attended of the licensing
[Guest]: committee convinced me that never under any circumstances should we have import licensing.
[Guest]: I mean, if you want to do some protection, do it through duties. And the reason that
[Guest]: makes sense is that, you know, when you do it through duties, sooner or later, people
[Guest]: will start asking the question, how come you want such a high duty protection? You know,
[Guest]: and if the user, on the other hand, feels that it's worth it to import, even at a higher
[Guest]: duty, you won't be easily able to persuade the ministry to jack up duties to unreasonable
[Guest]: levels. Whereas through this licensing system, I mean, it's completely non transparent.
[Amit Varma]: You've got another great example of this in your book. Both these stories are in your
[Amit Varma]: book, of course, the steel story and the Maruti story. And you also relate an anecdote which
[Amit Varma]: Narayan Murthy told you in 1983. And you're right in that your quote, Infosys wanted to
[Amit Varma]: import a data general MB 8000 computer with three removable disk drives with a capacity
[Amit Varma]: of 200 MB each, they had to make several trips to New Delhi to get the import license. By
[Amit Varma]: the time they got the license, a new disk drive with a capacity of 300 MB had become
[Amit Varma]: available 30% cheaper. Naturally, they wanted to import the latest model. However, the original
[Amit Varma]: license specified the model number, and several additional visits to Delhi had to be made
[Amit Varma]: to modify the license, stop quote. And, you know, the kind of absurdity which was just
[Amit Varma]: so incredibly sort of commonplace at the time. So before we come to your time in government,
[Amit Varma]: I think it's still a decade and a half to kind of get through after Oxford, you go to
[Amit Varma]: the World Bank. And at this point, when you're at the World Bank, you know, what is how do
[Amit Varma]: you see the rest of your life kind of panning out? Like, are you thinking that, okay, you
[Amit Varma]: know, I'm in the World Bank, and things are going well. And, you know, I'll be an economist
[Amit Varma]: here. And this is sort of my circle, I found my groove, or at the back of your mind, somewhere,
[Amit Varma]: is there a thought about going back at some point, because in your book, of course, you
[Amit Varma]: write that the two sort of the two seminal moments in your life for meeting a share and
[Amit Varma]: then coming back to India. And the two are, of course, related, because you decided that
[Amit Varma]: you'd rather have your kids grow up here and all of that. But before that's happening,
[Amit Varma]: when you're a young economist at the World Bank, you know, how Yeah, well, when I was
[Guest]: a young economist, before I met Isha, my idea was, I'll be there for three or four years,
[Guest]: pick up some experience, move back. Then I met Isha, we were kind of courting together
[Guest]: for a year or so, decided to get married. That, of course, altered the timing of coming
[Guest]: back. But she was also working and she needed to finish her PhD. So that stretched it out
[Guest]: by a few years, I must say that we enjoyed those few, it's not as if I was yearning to
[Guest]: get back, happily traveling around the world, very comfortable life, good salary, and so
[Guest]: on. But I was quite aware that as soon as she got her PhD, which she actually did in
[Guest]: 76, I think, that's when we would start thinking of moving back. And that's what we did, started
[Guest]: exploring, I got a job offer from the Ministry of Finance, I think something in 1977, or
[Guest]: early 78. Isha was our oldest son had just been born in 77. So we wanted a little more
[Guest]: time. And they agreed that I could come one year later. And so I went and joined the finance
[Guest]: ministry in 79. As soon as kids arrived, I mean, Isha was quite clear that, you know,
[Guest]: she wanted to go back. So I mean, that that, you know, when you have two people both have
[Guest]: a job, etc. You can sometimes have a situation where the two don't have the same view on
[Guest]: when to move as it happened in this particular case, the two were in the same direction.
[Guest]: And I had no problem heading back, having spent more time at the bank than I originally
[Amit Varma]: thought I would.
[Amit Varma]: So my next question actually comes from something that I read in Isha's book, which is also
[Amit Varma]: a beautiful book and a quick read. And one of the things that she says is that when she
[Amit Varma]: joined presidency, there were 24 boys and four girls in the class. And if a boy would
[Amit Varma]: happen to reach the class first, the girls would wait outside till the professor came.
[Amit Varma]: And if a girl happened to enter the class first, the boys would wait outside till the
[Amit Varma]: professor came. And later, she points out that when you the first time you dated you
[Amit Varma]: took her to lunch or dinner, or whatever. The thing she points out that impressed her
[Amit Varma]: was that you treated her as an intellectual equal, and thereby implying that most people
[Amit Varma]: did not that most people had a sort of a different attitude. And when so my question to you is
[Amit Varma]: really about how you have seen notions of gender evolve over those decades into context.
[Amit Varma]: One is a context that back then there simply would not have been so many female economists,
[Amit Varma]: it would have been a male dominated workplace everywhere. And I guess a natural attitude
[Amit Varma]: even today, the natural attitude, honestly, is to talk down to women and to interrupt
[Amit Varma]: them all the time and all of that. And back then, I guess this must have been even worse.
[Amit Varma]: So one, it's, you know, is this something that you consciously thought about? Because
[Amit Varma]: it would have been reflexive for most people to actually behave in those ways without thinking
[Amit Varma]: that it's odd in any way. You know, like one metric that I forget which guest of mine so
[Amit Varma]: I apologize to her but has spoken about is I think Shayana Bhattacharya mentioned it
[Amit Varma]: and I've also read pieces on this is Shayana mentioned and she works with the World Bank.
[Amit Varma]: And she said that whenever I would go to whenever I go to meetings, if there's a man with me,
[Amit Varma]: they're always talking to the man, they're never talking to me. And somewhere else, somebody
[Amit Varma]: pointed out a metric that just take a man with you. If they're talking to the man, they're
[Amit Varma]: not the kind of person you deal with where you're just uncomfortable talking to a woman.
[Amit Varma]: So one at this aspect of it, how much has the field changed in all this time, because
[Amit Varma]: women obviously bring different perspectives and that diversity helps in just sharpening
[Amit Varma]: people's thinking. And the other perspective is that we often tend to, you know, a point
[Amit Varma]: that sort of Prernal Pandey and Amitabh Bhandare have made at different points in time, while
[Amit Varma]: on the show is that for every problem that there is in India, there is an aspect of it,
[Amit Varma]: which is an even deeper problem. And that's the role of gender. So if you look at agriculture,
[Amit Varma]: what women farmers go through is there's a whole separate layer of suffering that there's
[Amit Varma]: involved there, in education, a whole different layer of scarcity that girls go through as
[Amit Varma]: opposed to boys, and so on and so forth. And as an economist, it would seem that at one
[Amit Varma]: moment in time, it's you're obsessed with problems that are fundamentally men's problems.
[Amit Varma]: When you're counting GDP, you're looking at what men are producing and not perhaps unpaid
[Amit Varma]: labor in the household and so on. So these are really two separate questions. So I apologize
[Amit Varma]: for inflicting them on you at the same time. But one how, you know, what was your personal
[Amit Varma]: view towards the way gender was evolving? And how much has it changed? And to that component
[Amit Varma]: of gender in thinking about the world? What do you think about that?
[Guest]: Well, you know, I was, of course, very aware of the gender aspect, simply because having
[Guest]: met Isha, she frequently made me aware that this is a problem, I could recognize it's
[Guest]: a problem. I wouldn't say that I wouldn't say that I worried about it deeply. But I
[Guest]: sort of recognize it. Yes, you're right. And hopefully, it'll change over time. You know,
[Guest]: the awareness of what a problem it is from a development point of view, this was a bit
[Guest]: slower in coming. And I wasn't fully aware of the extent to which these biases exist.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, if you're a woman farmer, it's not easy to get a loan, especially, for
[Guest]: example, if the land is not in your name, and you could multiply these examples. So
[Guest]: I would I would agree with the proposition that the gender aspect is another layer of
[Guest]: problems. And in order to understand the nature of problems, you got to appreciate the gender
[Guest]: aspect much more than we do. And I think we were not, I mean, of course, we were sensitized
[Guest]: that that we ourselves would not discriminate. We do not think that women are inferior. I
[Guest]: don't remember, for example, ever talking past a woman in occasions when I had to interact
[Guest]: with with her professionally. But the honest truth is that there weren't too many such
[Guest]: occasions, because the number of women was very, very limited. But I think after coming
[Guest]: to India, more than that, actually, even maybe as recently as in the Planning Commission,
[Guest]: I was made much more aware that the really deep problems that we have to address. I mean,
[Guest]: for example, I early on came to the conclusion that if you're going to give cash support
[Guest]: to households, give it to the women in the household and not the men. And it's interesting
[Guest]: because a lot of people used to say that if you give it to the men, they'll just drink
[Guest]: it away. And if you give it to the women, they'll just beat up the women, take away
[Guest]: the money. That's not true. I mean, if you give it to the women, actually, the men are
[Guest]: sufficiently civilized that they won't do that. But it's true that if you give it to
[Guest]: them, they may gamble it away or throw it away or whatever. So I think the point that
[Guest]: these women have made about gender is more important than we allowed for. And certainly,
[Guest]: I mean, you know, later on, things in this world of, in a woke world, the extent to which
[Guest]: women experience sexual harassment, this was just not evident there. I mean, maybe they
[Guest]: weren't enough. I mean, not enough women. But later on, you know, as I got to talk to
[Guest]: women, they would point out that this is true.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me now a bit about, you know, coming to India, for example, you've pointed out
[Amit Varma]: that you know, you wanted to start a family, career wise, it was just the right time, right
[Amit Varma]: place, you came to Delhi, both of you have written in your books about that legendary
[Amit Varma]: meeting with Udham Singh ji at Khyber restaurant, where he introduced you to Manmohan Singh,
[Amit Varma]: for the first time, who was then teaching at the Delhi School of Economics. And Manmohan
[Amit Varma]: took a liking to you guys and said, Yeah, you should come. So yeah, tell me, tell me
[Amit Varma]: a bit about that, and how that process played out in your head and all of that.
[Guest]: Well, I think I won't be able to add anything. But since you mentioned it, it was a it was
[Guest]: a very interesting occasion. When Udham wanted to take us out, I didn't realize that he was
[Guest]: going to call Manmohan Singh also. So that was fun. We got to meet, at that time, a distinguished
[Guest]: academic, but I had no idea that this guy was going to become ultimately a very important
[Guest]: determinant of where I went to work. And you know, it was just like a normal kind of dinner.
[Guest]: The thing I regret is I've never been to the Khyber restaurant since then. I don't know
[Guest]: if it still exists, by the way. It wasn't it wasn't at that time, much of a restaurant,
[Guest]: but it was the nearest thing to the university that Udham could think of. And we it was my
[Guest]: first exposure, not to a government person, but to a senior academic in the Delhi School
[Amit Varma]: of Economics.
[Amit Varma]: And once you sort of came back and you joined government, was was it sort of like what was
[Amit Varma]: that period of adjustment? Like, because you come from a very different environment where
[Amit Varma]: you're dealing with ideas, and I presume you're reading papers, having intellectual conversations.
[Amit Varma]: Here you're kind of on the ground in the middle of this machine. And everything could simultaneously
[Amit Varma]: seem daunting and frustrating and all of that. So tell me a little bit about you know, your
[Amit Varma]: early times in government and what that was like.
[Guest]: Well, it was, you're right, it's very different from something like the World Bank, because
[Guest]: in the World Bank, you're making assessments of other countries. So you're preparing reports
[Guest]: on those countries. In the Ministry of Finance, you're actually processing multiple proposals,
[Guest]: which go through different ministries, and you get an opportunity to comment. You don't
[Guest]: you don't you don't get an opportunity to write a whole essay. I mean, a proposal comes
[Guest]: up in a file, and you have to make a comment on that particular proposal. It takes a long
[Guest]: time before you realize that, look, you've got to limit yourself to what is relevant.
[Guest]: And how can you push it in the right direction or not? You know, half the problem is that
[Guest]: you think that most of the proposals that have been put forward belong to a world which
[Guest]: they shouldn't have existed to begin with. But you can't say that I'm not going to have
[Guest]: a view on this particular action. So that takes a little bit of doing. I think the other
[Guest]: thing is that it was quite a collegial world. I mean, I had my doubts, how easy it would
[Guest]: be to interact with, say, other IAS officers. But you know, we would, at the joint secretary
[Guest]: level, economic advisors and joint secretaries, same level, we would occasionally, we'd meet
[Guest]: for lunch in each other's rooms, bringing along our dabbas, where there were no nice cafeterias
[Guest]: to go to. But you spent about an hour chit-chatting about what's happening, about politics, where
[Guest]: things are going and so on. And that was a very important part of sort of becoming part
[Guest]: of the team. And I felt that if you invested a bit of time in it, and you didn't kind of
[Guest]: throw your weight around saying, I'm the economist, and you must listen to me. There were quite
[Guest]: willing to listen to you as one of the team. But it is time consuming, because you have
[Guest]: to invest in becoming part of the team. Now, one of the interesting things in the government,
[Guest]: of course, is that when you come in as an economist, you have some existing fellows
[Guest]: there. A year later, one third of them have moved on. New fellows come. To the new fellows,
[Guest]: you're part of the existing apparatus, so you're an insider. I mean, it's an interesting
[Guest]: way in which the system works. I didn't find it difficult at all to get on with people.
[Guest]: And I think I made a lot of friends and colleagues, and many of them moved in time with me. I
[Guest]: was younger than them. So one of the consequences of this was that by the time I became secretary,
[Guest]: most of the others who became secretary retired within two or three years, but I had several
[Guest]: years to go. So that gave me a big advantage of just being around longer than the others.
[Amit Varma]: You know, while writing about that period of the ministry, you speak about the three
[Amit Varma]: things you did, which is you helped MPs prepare parliamentary answers, you, you know, helped
[Amit Varma]: on notes for inter-ministerial meetings, and you worked on the economic survey. But you
[Amit Varma]: described the inter-ministerial meetings as the most important part. And there's this
[Amit Varma]: lovely passage where you say, quote, Mao Tse Tung famously said that gorillas must move
[Amit Varma]: among the people like fish in water, difficult to detect, but working from within. It was
[Amit Varma]: surprisingly relevant advice for an economist in government in those days. It did not always
[Amit Varma]: work if strong vested interests were involved, but it was an essential first step. On reflection,
[Amit Varma]: I think my participation in inter-ministerial committees had more impact on policy than
[Amit Varma]: anything I might have put in the economic survey, stop quote. And I was struck by this
[Amit Varma]: because like one, of course, I have an interest in gorilla warfare, and I've read up a lot
[Amit Varma]: about that. But in this context of moving like a fish among water, sounded really fascinating
[Amit Varma]: to me. And then it strikes me that once you realize this, does a significant part of it
[Amit Varma]: also does a significant part of your job, not just have to do with thinking about policy,
[Amit Varma]: but thinking in a strategic way about getting the kind of outcomes that you want within
[Guest]: the department? Yeah, it does. I mean, I think this is where the big problem, you know, I
[Guest]: discovered very early on that the economic survey was an interesting document to write
[Guest]: in the sense that people looking at what's going on would regard it as a definitive statement
[Guest]: of the government's view. But it wasn't the way to make policy because it was well understood
[Guest]: that you could have all kinds of homilies in the economic survey, but nobody ever thought
[Guest]: that they necessarily had to be reflected in policy. So if you want to have an impact
[Guest]: on policy, you want to persuade people in these inter-ministerial meetings to think
[Guest]: a little differently. And I found people were really quite willing to entertain different
[Guest]: thoughts. Very often they would say, well, that's not going to work because and then
[Guest]: if you could argue, no, no, it's not that simple. But as long as you don't have a kind
[Guest]: of I'm the expert, listen to me type of attitude, you're just part of a team. And the thing
[Guest]: that I found missing and which led ultimately to my writing the M document is that, you
[Guest]: know, there's very little opportunity in government to take a holistic view of what is wrong because
[Guest]: every ministry works within the confines of its terms of reference. The Ministry of Commerce,
[Guest]: for example, is responsible for providing import licenses to exporters and also to give
[Guest]: in those days subsidies. So their idea of promoting exports invariably was, let's give
[Guest]: more import licenses in an easier way and let's give more export subsidies. The most
[Guest]: important thing for exporters is the exchange rate. That's not the function of the Commerce
[Guest]: Ministry. So Commerce Ministry not only didn't worry about it, but very rarely said anything
[Guest]: about it. And occasionally they said they would just say, you must have a realistic
[Guest]: exchange rate. But that didn't mean anything. That's where I think I found that we need
[Guest]: periodically somebody taking a holistic look and saying, look, if this is what you want,
[Guest]: these are five things you have to change. And these things are interrelated. I mean,
[Guest]: changing one is not going to do anything. I make the point in the book, for example,
[Guest]: all industrialists felt that industrial licenses should be got rid of because they want to
[Guest]: expand. They should be allowed to expand. Very sensible. But the point is, if you didn't
[Guest]: get rid of import licensing, everybody who wanted to expand would ask for a import of
[Guest]: capital good permission, which would be given by the Commerce Ministry. So instead of queuing
[Guest]: up in the front of the industry ministry, they'd all queue up in the Commerce Ministry.
[Guest]: If on the other hand, you got rid of import licensing and freed the exchange rate, then
[Guest]: the exchange rate would depreciate if there was too much demand for import. You wouldn't
[Guest]: have a bunch of officials saying there's too much demand. What should we cut? Allow this.
[Guest]: Don't allow that. The system would actually work together. It would have been useless
[Guest]: just getting rid of one of these things and not doing the other. And that, I think, is
[Guest]: a I drew special attention to this point in the M document. And I was lucky that a year
[Guest]: later you had the crisis and we were able to get a lot of things this done. And I'm
[Guest]: sure this problem must be recurring in different contexts all the time, that each ministry,
[Guest]: if you ask a ministry to do something, it almost never says get some other ministry
[Guest]: to stop making making it difficult. They look at what instruments they've got and how can
[Guest]: they use those to promote something. You've got a lovely quote in your book, which I'll
[Amit Varma]: read out again, where you wrote, quote, we had all learned to students have a particular
[Amit Varma]: policy that made sense in a first best situation where all other policies were properly deployed,
[Amit Varma]: may not work in a second best situation where other policies were suboptimal. As developing
[Amit Varma]: countries suffered from innumerable constraints, the policymaking had to be of the second best
[Amit Varma]: variety. And I was particularly keen to observe how this worked in practice, stop, quote,
[Amit Varma]: and what you sort of mentioned about departments working in silos. So you are in a particular
[Amit Varma]: department, somebody comes to you, you're not stepping back and seeing the bigger picture,
[Amit Varma]: you're not incentivized to step back and see the bigger picture, you just do what you can.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore you are tackling just one little cog. And that doesn't really change anything.
[Amit Varma]: And I would imagine that one of the ways that you are able to see the bigger picture is
[Amit Varma]: because you're an outsider. You're not in that sense, a career bureaucrat and insider
[Amit Varma]: is officers anyway tend to be generalists. So their, you know, appreciation of the nuances
[Amit Varma]: of anything would necessarily be limited, not their fault, but if they're generalist,
[Amit Varma]: that's how it is. So one was being an outsider, something that helped you sort of get this
[Amit Varma]: bigger picture. And in that case, would you recommend that more outsiders join government
[Amit Varma]: in specialized positions? And two, was it nevertheless a little lonely? Because you
[Amit Varma]: would then have been looking at the world in a way that most people around you would
[Amit Varma]: not have shared. And you would have also then to be careful and strategic about when to
[Amit Varma]: express a particular point of view that may clash with the way things are done.
[Guest]: That's a tough question to answer. I mean, you know, I think the short answer is that
[Guest]: you can't run complex ministries just by generalists. That's certainly true. When you say outsiders,
[Guest]: I mean, you mean people with specialist expertise in something.
[Amit Varma]: People with specialist expertise and also someone who's from outside the system. You
[Amit Varma]: haven't worked in the government all your career. You've been in the World Bank, you've
[Amit Varma]: done your other things, and then you've come.
[Guest]: Well, in any system, it's a good idea to bring in some outsiders. I would have said that
[Guest]: the thing that was most missing is that, you know, given that many things now have to be
[Guest]: done basically by the private sector, government needs to have a much better understanding
[Guest]: of what are the constraints of the private sector and what is it that will really make
[Guest]: them do what you want them to do. It's not always easy to find out because talking to
[Guest]: a private sector guy, I mean, he's constrained by whatever is good for his firm. He's not
[Guest]: necessarily going to give you what is best from the point of view of the market as a
[Guest]: whole.
[Guest]: So I think policy has to be opened up, and you've got to have interactions between different
[Guest]: stakeholders in which I think generalists can also play a role. But we need far more
[Guest]: consultation, to-ing and fro-ing, and that sort of stuff in the process of making policy.
[Guest]: And was it lonely?
[Guest]: I didn't think so. I mean, I felt that I enjoyed it, to be honest. I mean, lonely would mean
[Guest]: not having friends.
[Amit Varma]: Not in not in a social sense, but in a sense of not many people who perhaps agree with
[Guest]: your ideas.
[Guest]: No, I mean, maybe I was lucky, but I found that many people actually agreed with those
[Guest]: ideas, but they were caught in a particular silo. Being an economist, I was in some sense,
[Guest]: I could assume that I can kind of think more broadly. But technically, you know, there
[Guest]: was the Planning Commission. You now have the Niti Aayog. So there are institutions
[Guest]: that are cross-ministerial. And there's no reason why they shouldn't be used in order
[Guest]: to get that kind of an overview, which goes beyond the requirements of a silo.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one distinction that you made, which is perhaps relevant to this period in time,
[Amit Varma]: though you made it in the book with reference to the post 91 period and to Narsimha Rao
[Amit Varma]: and Manmohan Singh, is a distinction between reform by stealth and gradualism, which you
[Amit Varma]: point out, they are sometimes often confused for each other, but they are different and
[Amit Varma]: you write, quote, gradualism implies a clear indication of where we are heading, but with
[Amit Varma]: an acceptance that the pace of change will be tailored to make it more acceptable. Reform
[Amit Varma]: by stealth is essentially opportunistic. You point in a broad direction without committing
[Amit Varma]: to any particular pace of change, and then take a step forward whenever it is politically
[Amit Varma]: opportune to do so. The trouble with such an approach is that it can never create a
[Amit Varma]: broader constituency for reforms looking ahead. Dr. Singh was a genuine gradualist, he conceptualized
[Amit Varma]: a complex and multi dimensional structure of reform, and consistently articulated the
[Amit Varma]: need for it, while acknowledging that change must be made slowly to be digestible, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote. But in the 80s, before everything has happened, you're in the 80s, you're in these
[Amit Varma]: ministries, government is what it is, you know, massive in its scope, and you know,
[Amit Varma]: not nearly as strong as it should be in the things that it does. And it's this bureaucratic
[Amit Varma]: machine and you're trying to be a fish moving among water, you know, how do you play the
[Amit Varma]: long game? Like, did you have a sense of yourself playing the long game? And saying that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, these are the changes we want, we've got to look for opportunities, we've got to
[Amit Varma]: create those opportunities, if possible, we've constantly got to figure out the best way
[Amit Varma]: to get these messages out either to the politicians we interact with, or within our department,
[Amit Varma]: or to the people at large, wherever we can, you know, a lot of this stuff one thinks about
[Amit Varma]: in hindsight, and you know, one thinks about it in a post facto way. But at the time, you
[Amit Varma]: know, how are you guys thinking about it?
[Guest]: Well, you know, I think, I don't think I was taking a long view of how we're going to do
[Guest]: it. Because during the period when I was a joint secretary, or even an additional secretary,
[Guest]: I wasn't in a position where I'd be able to think of orchestrating the whole thing. I
[Guest]: was just fortunate that in 1990, sorry, in 89, when the Congress government under Rajiv
[Guest]: Gandhi was going in for an election, I had a very good boss, that was BG Deshmukh. Deshmukh
[Guest]: was the cabinet secretary, later became secretary to the Prime Minister, and he came from Bombay,
[Guest]: as Chief Secretary Maharashtra. And you know, it's interesting that unlike the other senior
[Guest]: officials, he was not actually anti-private sector. And he had a genuine sense that, look,
[Guest]: the private sector has a lot of capabilities, and we should be using them more. And you
[Guest]: know, he and I tried to get a few things done, and he was always supportive. I remember,
[Guest]: for example, you know, we had in the case of cement, we'd had a gradual liberalization
[Guest]: increasing the market share of cement year by year. And towards the end of the Rajiv
[Guest]: Gandhi government, one area which was controlled was aluminum. I mean, there were four producers,
[Guest]: and NALCO had just come in with a big production capability. And so there was talk about should
[Guest]: we do partial decontrol, et cetera, and so on. So I had a discussion with Deshmukh, and
[Guest]: I said, look, that's what we did with cement. It took four or five years. I think in this
[Guest]: one, there's enough supply, we can just decontrol. I mean, the private sector guys who may not
[Guest]: like the fall in price, I mean, they've had a pretty good time so far. So let's kind of
[Guest]: do it at one go. And Deshmukh supported that, got Rajiv Gandhi to agree that we could go
[Guest]: and discuss with Fotedar whether this is feasible or not. And when Fotedar saw both Deshmukh
[Guest]: and me coming in, he sort of assumed that the PM must have approved it, because we persuaded
[Guest]: him that look, this is the thing we should do. Now, had I done it, it wouldn't have counted.
[Guest]: But if I'm doing it, and Deshmukh is doing it, that for him, for ND Tiwari would have
[Guest]: counted, sorry, for Fotedar would have counted a lot. And Fotedar had no sort of ideological
[Guest]: preoccupation. He felt these two guys are saying it, Rajivji must be in favor, said,
[Guest]: of course, let's do it. And we did it. And there was no problem at all. So this was a
[Guest]: very good case where the country was ready for decontrol, mainly because a new producer
[Guest]: had come in, producing a whole lot of things, NALCO. And the existing guys, some of them
[Guest]: may have had some marketing difficulty, but there was no shortage. Nobody said prices
[Guest]: are going sky high and all this kind of stuff. I mean, you need to judge when the time is
[Guest]: right. This happened to be a case where it was a silo decision. And all we needed was
[Guest]: a silo, the silo taking the right decision. But when it's a broader one, it becomes more
[Guest]: complex. And that, that's really what one needs to, government should be constantly
[Guest]: aware of the complexity of what it is doing, and therefore subjecting everything to an
[Guest]: internal but critical look. You know, how to create a capability of internal critical
[Guest]: assessment is very important, because governments typically don't like criticizing other ministries.
[Guest]: So you need to build that, build that capability very consciously.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned Mr. Deshbhukh, and one of my favorite quotes in the book is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: after the VP Singh government came and you were kept on, both of you were kept on in
[Amit Varma]: the ministries where you were, he said to you, quote, Montek, Delhi aisa shahar hai
[Amit Varma]: jahan kab badalte hai lekin chamche nahi, which is untranslatable, because of the dual
[Amit Varma]: meaning of chamche as it were. And two more quotes which speak to your point about the
[Amit Varma]: complexity and interrelated nature of everything. And one is IG Patel telling Rajiv Gandhi around
[Amit Varma]: the time Rajiv takes power, IG Patel tells him, quote, Mr. PM, there is a lot of interest
[Amit Varma]: in what you are doing on the economic front. If I may offer some advice, please make a
[Amit Varma]: bonfire of all industrial controls. You won't regret it, stop quote. And the other quote
[Amit Varma]: which speaks exactly to this point that you made is LK Jha speaking to Rajiv Gandhi and
[Amit Varma]: saying, quote, Prime Minister, the Indian economy is like a vehicle with many brakes
[Amit Varma]: pressed fully on, releasing one or two brakes will not make it move. You have to release
[Amit Varma]: many more to get results, stop quote. So it's not as if there wasn't realization of this,
[Amit Varma]: you know, obviously, a bunch of you knew, I mean, this is, of course, a quote from Jha
[Amit Varma]: to Rajiv Gandhi, Rajiv Gandhi knew as well, right. But there was some reforms momentum
[Amit Varma]: under him, which kind of died down and for a, you know, a bunch of reasons. But what
[Amit Varma]: was that period like? Was there a sense of excitement that yes, there might be movement,
[Amit Varma]: we can get some of these things done, and so on? What was?
[Guest]: Yeah, I can. I mean, I think there was a lot of excitement because, first of all, you had
[Guest]: a very young Prime Minister. I mean, he was about the same age as I was. So when you're
[Guest]: there, and you suddenly see someone as Prime Minister of your age, you know, that always
[Guest]: becomes a little special. And I think he had talked about, we must bring India to the 21st
[Guest]: century. A lot of younger people thought, aha, big changes are coming. You know, after
[Guest]: his government ended, Veer Sanghvi and Avik Sarkar interviewed him in a very frank interview.
[Guest]: And they asked him that, look, aren't you a bit disappointed that you really didn't
[Guest]: get done all the things you thought would be necessary? And he was very frank, and said
[Guest]: why? And he was quite frank. He said, you know, I think lack of experience. I mean,
[Guest]: and later on, in other contexts, he had said that if he got another chance, he would do
[Guest]: it differently. You know, the fact is that he started with a couple of people who were
[Guest]: very pro the idea of doing things differently. V.P. Singh was one of them. And in the first
[Guest]: two years, their partnership was really very productive. But in the rest of his cabinet,
[Guest]: I don't think it was a single person who shared his ideas. And, you know, if you look at what
[Guest]: happened in China, I mean, Deng Xiaoping, I mean, first of all, he had huge experience.
[Guest]: Rajiv Gandhi had almost none. But even Deng Xiaoping took a long time to weed out, build
[Guest]: a team of people supportive of his ideas, so that things could move forward. And, you
[Guest]: know, it was quite remarkable because he after all, he completely reversed the entire direction
[Guest]: given by Mao Zedong, without once criticizing Mao Zedong. So in a way, that was part of
[Guest]: the problem in India that since Rajiv Gandhi was succeeding another Congress government,
[Guest]: it wasn't a case where you would blame the previous government for making a mess. But
[Guest]: if you still have been able to define an agenda of change, and I think to do that, you need
[Guest]: insiders, companions in the political sphere. Now, in my book, I say that, you know, politics
[Guest]: got the better of him. Once the Bofors thing exploded, the whole political situation changed.
[Guest]: And he didn't really have much time to think about all these things, nor any conviction
[Guest]: in his cabinet. So these ideas sort of had to wait for a different time and a different
[Guest]: situation.
[Amit Varma]: So during this period of time, there is sort of momentum building up, at least in terms
[Amit Varma]: of ideas towards what will eventually happen, you know, Rakesh Mohan has his note of 86,
[Amit Varma]: internal discussions are happening, and you talk about the M document, which I have heard,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so many people regard as absolutely seminal, which you came up with in 1990, and
[Amit Varma]: was, of course, widely criticized at the time by the left. And it's amusing to read those
[Amit Varma]: today. Tell me a little bit about the M document, how it came about, and you know, and a brief
[Amit Varma]: sense of what his contents were.
[Guest]: Well, you know, it began when the election was going on. And Deshmukh had said to me,
[Guest]: why is it that we're not able to get our ideas translated into functioning policies. And
[Guest]: I thought about it. And I said, the reason is that we don't take a comprehensive look
[Guest]: at what is needed. We just tell ministries to do something which happens to be in their
[Guest]: area. But what is needed to get that done involves many other ministries. And nobody's
[Guest]: taking a comprehensive look, saying, look, this is what's done. So he said, why don't
[Guest]: you write a note. And if Rajiv Gandhi comes back, and he's reelected, we'll give it to
[Guest]: him. So I started working on such a note. Of course, Rajiv Gandhi didn't come back,
[Guest]: VP Singh came back. And as you record, as you report, you mentioned earlier, contrary
[Guest]: to our expectations, both Deshmukh and I were continued under VP Singh. You know, VP Singh
[Guest]: went to Malaysia. And I was part of this was some Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting.
[Guest]: And I was part of the team. And he said to me that, you know, I'm really struck at how
[Guest]: much progress Kuala Lumpur has made. Because I had come here in 1973. I mean, this is he's
[Guest]: going there in 1990. In 1973, as Deputy Commerce Minister, and has really made huge progress.
[Guest]: And I said, you know, that's absolutely true. Because I used to visit here in the early
[Guest]: 70s, from the World Bank. And it's now unrecognizable. So he said, Why do you think that's true?
[Guest]: I said, because they've done reforms, and we don't want to do reform. He said, then
[Guest]: you write me a paper on what we should do. So I'd been working on this other thing, I
[Guest]: quickly polished it up, gave it to him. You know, I have a feeling he understood that
[Guest]: this was necessary. But he was, of course, running a very shaky government. But he had
[Guest]: the he had sufficient conviction, to say, send it to the cabinet secretary. So it can
[Guest]: be discussed in the committee of secretaries. He sent it to the cabinet secretary, Vinod
[Guest]: Pandey was then the cabinet, whom I knew. And Vinod liked the paper. And he said, Okay,
[Guest]: you'll have a discussion. And it's interesting, you might think that Vinod was not at all.
[Guest]: But I mean, if you posed him with a kind of a holistic picture, he sort of says quite
[Guest]: a good paper. We had this discussion. And of course, in the discussion, I mean, Amarnath
[Guest]: supported it, Amarnath Varma, he was an industry minister. Finance Ministry was not supportive,
[Guest]: but Madhu Dandavate was not in favor of all this liberalization and so on. Planning Commission
[Guest]: was not supportive, because Planning Commission felt why is the PMO doing this, because we
[Guest]: are preparing the midterm approach to the next plan. So you're treading on our toes,
[Guest]: etc. And there was all this big discussion, leftists very negative. But then when the
[Guest]: when the thing was discussed, several thoughtful economists wrote saying good things. So it
[Guest]: was not the case that everybody was negative. I feel that there was more support for these
[Guest]: ideas than surfaced, because I don't think we pose these things in a in a composite manner,
[Guest]: the way the M document did. Well, I mean, the VP Singh government didn't last, but it
[Guest]: exited in the middle of a first rate crisis. And by the time Narsimha Rao's government
[Guest]: came back, I mean, you only had about one month of imports in reserves. So it was a
[Guest]: very clear situation where something had to be done an opportunity to do something. And
[Guest]: I'm glad that they I mean, that was really, it was Manmohan Singh who would have picked
[Guest]: up all this persuaded the finance minister that we must do this. I had said in the paper
[Guest]: that you know, we should reduce the customs duties quite a bit. And let that be reflected
[Guest]: in the exchange rate in a gradualist kind of way, through an EXIM script or something,
[Guest]: which is more or less what was done. I mean, first a devaluation, then the EXIM script,
[Guest]: then move to a dual exchange rate. Things moved very, very quickly in that 1991 period.
[Guest]: And the number of things that were done so quickly, I don't think we've ever had that
[Guest]: much change. We never had it before. We probably need something of that kind moving ahead.
[Guest]: Because the world is changing, and posing new challenges to us.
[Amit Varma]: You know, speaking about the imperatives of the political imperatives of VP Singh, you
[Amit Varma]: have this lovely quote by Dr. Manmohan Singh, which is quote, politicians have to be in
[Amit Varma]: power long enough to act like statesman, stop quote, which goes back to what we were discussing
[Amit Varma]: earlier, how political incentives just go in such different directions. And you've given
[Amit Varma]: examples of, you know, VP Singh's preoccupation with short term objectives and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I'd encourage listeners to read the book. It's just such a thrilling thing
[Amit Varma]: now after all these years to actually read the inside story of what went on. My question
[Amit Varma]: here is this, that I feel that, like one thing that I have said, and perhaps this is too
[Amit Varma]: negative is that politics corrodes character. And let me explain my reasoning behind that.
[Amit Varma]: The reasoning is that once you enter politics, your raison d'etre necessarily is coming to
[Amit Varma]: power no matter what it takes the will to power as it were. So you might enter politics
[Amit Varma]: with a certain set of principles that I want social justice, or I want this or I want that.
[Amit Varma]: But the moment you enter that game, you are playing an entirely different game, you are
[Amit Varma]: raising money for elections, there are quid pro quos involved in that you have to appeal
[Amit Varma]: to certain constituencies, you have to pay a price for that. And eventually over a period
[Amit Varma]: of time, if you stay long enough, your core beliefs don't matter, because you have none
[Amit Varma]: everything is about the will to power. And when we speak about, you know, you speak about
[Amit Varma]: how you worked at the finance ministry when VP Singh was finance minister under Rajiv
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi, and he was so open to trying new things and just all of that. But when it actually
[Amit Varma]: came to actions when he was Prime Minister, these were constraints, you know, nobody can
[Amit Varma]: do anything if they're in his shoes, they're going to perhaps do the same things. But on
[Amit Varma]: the other hand, once in a while, you do come across politicians who are decisive like Mr.
[Amit Varma]: Narsimha Rao did, for example, the kind of support that certainly in that initial period,
[Amit Varma]: which he gave Manmohan Singh and all of you to kind of do what happened. So what is your
[Amit Varma]: sense of this? You've interacted with many, many, many politicians, and I won't ask you
[Amit Varma]: to take any names or give examples. But in general, what do you feel about this? Is there
[Amit Varma]: a certain sympathy you feel for them given their constraints? Is there something to the
[Amit Varma]: notion that the will to power being the key imperative, that you always have to work around
[Amit Varma]: that that to make a policy accepted by a politician, you first have to make it sellable and show
[Amit Varma]: them why it is good for the electorate?
[Guest]: No, I'm afraid that's probably true. And not just in India, but anywhere. I mean, a lot
[Guest]: I think depends on the quality of the politics. I mean, if the quality of the politics is
[Guest]: such that in the end, while you can manipulate politics, you can do a little bit of teasing
[Guest]: out a certain outcome. As long as the political system rewards good performance, politician
[Guest]: will have a strong incentive to show good performance. And a lot of that has to do also
[Guest]: with political education of the public. I mean, the public has to know that some kind
[Guest]: of political handouts are really not good for even the public at large. But it's very
[Guest]: difficult to resolve that problem. In practice. I'm not giving a very good answer because
[Guest]: what I'm really saying is, it is a problem and I don't know how to solve it. But I think
[Guest]: the only answer I can give is that you should hope that politics is such that a large part
[Guest]: of electoral support will be triggered by good performance in areas that are important.
[Guest]: As long as you can have that, yes, there'll be little diversion here and there, but broad
[Guest]: thrust will be in the right direction.
[Amit Varma]: So taking off on that, you know, when we think of the political marketplace, it's a marketplace
[Amit Varma]: of demand and supply. Politicians are the supply end of it and the people at large are
[Amit Varma]: the demand end of it, right? And I've always sort of held that there's no point if you're
[Amit Varma]: a reformer or if you're an activist for X policy or Y policy, to just speak to the supply
[Amit Varma]: end because supply will always respond to demand. So you have to speak to the demand
[Amit Varma]: end. If your ideas become popular, then the politician will automatically gravitate to
[Amit Varma]: carrying them out. And this is what makes me feel a little despondent, because number
[Amit Varma]: one, many of the core ideas, which I'm assuming you'd share with me and which are core truths
[Amit Varma]: of economics, like the positive sumness of things, that for someone to win, someone else
[Amit Varma]: doesn't have to lose, every trade makes both people better off, or something like the notion
[Amit Varma]: of spontaneous order, which we also mentioned earlier, are counterintuitive. You know, we've
[Amit Varma]: evolved in prehistoric times, we lived in small tribes, our brains have evolved to think
[Amit Varma]: of the world in zero-sum ways because of the scarcity of those times and so on. We've evolved
[Amit Varma]: to think with an engineering top-down mindset that you got to build it, you got to control
[Amit Varma]: it, that spontaneous order is just completely counterintuitive to us. So that's one aspect
[Amit Varma]: that many of these essential truths about the world are counterintuitive. And the other
[Amit Varma]: aspect is that in popular, in the conventional view that is popular out there, is full of
[Amit Varma]: all kinds of fallacies, which is why if at a time of scarcity, some particular thing
[Amit Varma]: gets too expensive, there will be a popular demand ki price control lagao. Now, we know
[Amit Varma]: price controls lead to scarcities, but that's going to be the popular demand. And similarly,
[Amit Varma]: and popular demands will always be based on intentions and not outcomes, you know, which
[Amit Varma]: is the classic thing that goes wrong. So I don't know if there's a question here, I seem
[Amit Varma]: to be underscoring what you were saying earlier. But my sense is that how difficult a challenge
[Amit Varma]: do you think this is? And therefore, do you think that, you know, people like yourself
[Amit Varma]: then also have a responsibility to be public intellectuals and put their ideas out there
[Amit Varma]: in the discourse so that they are being read all the time, like what I would have loved
[Amit Varma]: both you and Dr. Singh for all the great service that you perform to our country. But if you
[Amit Varma]: were also prolific columnist, I think in some small way, the needle would move in one direction.
[Amit Varma]: And this is really with hindsight, I'm saying and no doubt you had other things to do and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. But speaking of the current generation of people, you know, if you were
[Amit Varma]: young today, you know, is this how difficult do you think is this task of changing the
[Guest]: demand end of because then reforms don't have to be by stealth? Well, I mean, you can't
[Guest]: just operate on the demand side, absolutely lines of the electorate. I mean, this is what
[Guest]: in a in a in a contested political situation. This is what parties do. I mean, it's opposition
[Guest]: parties that have to educate the public that look, these are the situation, this is the
[Guest]: situation, this is what needs to be done. And if something not being done, then this
[Guest]: is going to be the consequence. So but clearly, you're right that the thinking crowd, the
[Guest]: opinion makers, so to speak, they have a big role to play. But mind you, this is one of
[Guest]: the things that we were discussing earlier. You know, in the in the world of social media,
[Guest]: this old idea of opinion makers has disappeared. I mean, there was a time when people thought
[Guest]: that if X or Y or Z were to write a paper writer op ed, everybody would say, well, you
[Guest]: know, that must be right. But today, opinions are being made on the basis of WhatsApp messages
[Guest]: sent out by all kinds of people. So frankly, it's not a world that I understand too well.
[Guest]: And this is not just India. People are saying this around the world. So somehow, how do
[Guest]: you communicate with the electorate? How do opinion makers make opinions that itself needs
[Guest]: to be put on the table in a much more frank manner? So we can work out how these things
[Guest]: are going to move. But in the end, it has to be mediated through political parties.
[Guest]: Because in a democracy, if it is political parties that are seeking support, it's for
[Guest]: the political parties to put these things across.
[Amit Varma]: I agree. And at the same time, I think that a lot of politics happens outside political
[Amit Varma]: parties and, you know, outside elections. You know, I mean, if you write a column today
[Amit Varma]: about tomorrow about a particular political situation, that is also an act of politics
[Amit Varma]: that you're getting your views out there for people to consider and think about and so
[Amit Varma]: on. So I think there is something there. But I agree with you that it's it's kind of a
[Amit Varma]: tough task. I want to now ask another question that all that is related to the question I
[Amit Varma]: asked earlier about the core beliefs of politicians, except here is about the core beliefs of people
[Amit Varma]: and the core beliefs even of say, economists or policymakers, like one of the disturbing
[Amit Varma]: trends that I've seen over the last few years, is that I have realised that many people who
[Amit Varma]: from all sides of the political divide, who espoused principles, were actually just wedded
[Amit Varma]: to a tribe, and that the thinking is tribal, and the principles are contingent. For example,
[Amit Varma]: in the US, we have seen how the entire Republican Party was just defaced and demeaned by Trump,
[Amit Varma]: and shifted over suddenly to supporting Trump, where a lot of what Trump preached was actually
[Amit Varma]: against core Republican values, for example, his opposition to free trade, and so on and
[Amit Varma]: so forth, you know, and many of the positions that he took to imagine conservatives or libertarian
[Amit Varma]: supporting that is outrageous. But as it turned out, many in the party didn't care about the
[Amit Varma]: principles of voice, they just cared about that they are part of this tribe. Similarly,
[Amit Varma]: in India, I had a deep disquiet around the time of demonetisation, where many of the
[Amit Varma]: economists who I think would immediately and instinctively see how utterly daft it is,
[Amit Varma]: didn't say anything because they were part of the establishment in some way, whether
[Amit Varma]: it's Arvind Panagaria in the Planning Commission, or so on and so forth, you know, Bebek Debroy
[Amit Varma]: was also there, and people within the ministries and so on and so forth, even though they obviously
[Amit Varma]: know that this is daft. And there are two ways of looking at that one way of looking
[Amit Varma]: at that is that they are gradualists, they are realists, they are within the system,
[Amit Varma]: they are thinking that there's no point my speaking out now, if I can make small changes
[Amit Varma]: on the margins, which make this country better off, I'll play that game. And I understand
[Amit Varma]: that. But at the same time, I feel like a lot of these people who I admired, because
[Amit Varma]: the stated principles seem to match mine, have abandoned those principles, because they've
[Amit Varma]: chosen the tribe, and that's a tribe and those principles were just posturing, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so in my mind, it's like the world is now divided into these two categories of people,
[Amit Varma]: people who actually believe in what they say, and people who say what they say, because
[Amit Varma]: at that moment, it's convenient and it's contingent. And that's the tribe they're part of, and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. And it depresses me a lot, because I think the former category,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and people like you and Dr. Singh would obviously be in that former category
[Amit Varma]: where you have your core set of principles, and you always fight for that. But so many
[Amit Varma]: other people who are also in prominent positions who are also public intellectuals in some
[Amit Varma]: ways, don't. So what are sort of your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Well, look, I would hope that at least public intellectuals should always be speaking, whatever
[Guest]: their principles are, trying to explain them. I recognize that when people are in government,
[Guest]: they're not expected to say things critical of the government. So you know, I mean, I
[Guest]: think on you mentioned demonetization, I didn't expect that anybody in government would have
[Guest]: criticized it once it was decided that it was going to be done. But I think when you
[Guest]: talked about the Republican Party, you made a more basic point there. Because you know,
[Guest]: the Republicans are not in that sense, part of government, they're not part of the administration.
[Guest]: So what you're seeing there is a political party is moving in a particular direction,
[Guest]: because it feels that's where its base is going. In the old days, maybe there was a
[Guest]: set of principles that they supported, and there was some assumption that the base would
[Guest]: kind of follow them. Here, they're following the base. And I think in a democratic environment,
[Guest]: you cannot avoid that. If that happens, you have to ask yourself, why does it happen?
[Guest]: I think this is part of, you know, the, it goes back to what we were discussing earlier,
[Guest]: that unlike the situation 20 years ago, where there was much greater clarity about how the
[Guest]: world is moving, this is a period when there isn't that clarity. So many, many kind of
[Guest]: things that were taken for granted, very recently, are now up for grabs. How you handle that
[Guest]: is another matter altogether. Not an easy one to answer.
[Amit Varma]: Is there any big issue on which you've changed your mind?
[Guest]: No, I wouldn't like to say, I mean, perceptions obviously change. Perhaps I would say that
[Guest]: I was never of the view that the right policy to follow was a kind of mindless opening up
[Guest]: of the economy. Remember, we were ridiculously closed. So it was a no brainer that we had
[Guest]: to open up. But I'm willing to consider the fact that in the present circumstances, if
[Guest]: we want to develop a competitive industry, you need to do something to support that industry.
[Guest]: But for example, I would be in favor of a support that is, as it were, not connected
[Guest]: with protection, but is connected with giving either subsidizing certain things, or helping
[Guest]: them do certain things, and so on. For example, the PLI system, which as many people have
[Guest]: criticized is mere protectionism. It's not mere protectionism, because it's giving it
[Guest]: a predetermined amount of support. What would become dangerous is if you have a PLI, and
[Guest]: when the fellows don't succeed, they then start lobbying for higher import duties. I
[Guest]: would say that if you're going to have a PLI scheme, it should be an understood part of
[Guest]: the whole thing, that the duties on this product will not increase, and will actually phase
[Guest]: down. Given that, okay, you're giving some support. But if you don't put in that as a
[Guest]: condition, nothing stops people from collecting the money under the PLI, and then saying for
[Guest]: a variety of reasons, we can't compete against somebody else. So why don't you ban the import
[Guest]: or jack up duties? And if we go down that route, it'll be very, very disturbing. I think
[Guest]: the other issue that I'm kind of struggling with, actually, is what do we do in the whole
[Guest]: area of trade negotiations? I mean, our traditional approach correctly, is that multilateral trade
[Guest]: negotiations are the best. But the problem is the world is kind of turned away from them.
[Guest]: And as a result, you've got groups formed, which are forming plurilateral agreements.
[Guest]: Historically, we've not been in favor of plurilateral agreements. And it's certainly true that if
[Guest]: you could do it multilaterally, that's better. But if that's not happening, then should we
[Guest]: ignore all plurilateral arrangements? I'm not sure. I think we should look for which
[Guest]: is the most sensible plurilateral regime to join, and join it and try and work from inside.
[Guest]: That's why I was in favor of RCEP, for example. Maybe RCEP was not very popular, because China
[Guest]: is a member. I don't know whether this new thing, the Indo-Pacific economic framework
[Guest]: will actually end up being a serious kind of arrangement, which could presage a plurilateral
[Guest]: trade bloc. But if it is, we should be in it. So you know, these are issues that as
[Guest]: the world changes, we need to, we need to kind of define if you like a second best solution,
[Guest]: given that the best is multilateral, but that's not happening.
[Amit Varma]: Let's go back to talking about the reforms period a little bit. At one point, you write
[Amit Varma]: in your book that when Narsimha Rao was asked, why has he taken a 180 degree turn, he said,
[Amit Varma]: quote, I have not turned at all, I am facing in the same direction. It is a world that
[Amit Varma]: has turned 180 degrees, stop quote, which is kind of glib, because in a sense, he was
[Amit Varma]: sort of forced to turn a little bit. Now, you know, that heady part where you discuss
[Amit Varma]: those few weeks where, you know, one after the other, you have the two step devaluation
[Amit Varma]: of the rupee, you have, you know, so much happening in terms of trade policy, industrial
[Amit Varma]: policy, it's heady, it's brilliant. What I found even more impressive was what happens
[Amit Varma]: in the next couple of decades after that, where as you point out, there is this enormous
[Amit Varma]: continuity, both in terms of the political level, where you have people, you know, initially
[Amit Varma]: Narsimha Rao, Manmohan Singh, Chidambaram, then later, Deve Gowda and IK Gujarat continue
[Amit Varma]: the same policies with Chidambaram as FM and then Atal Bihari Vajpayee's government where
[Amit Varma]: you have Yashwant Sinha, Jaswant Singh, Arun Shourie, just doing remarkable things. And
[Amit Varma]: then of course, UPA one where you guys come back at the bureaucratic level, you know,
[Amit Varma]: A. N. Verma, Rang Rajan, Bimal Jalal, Nitin Desai, Vijay Kelkar, it's a it's a litany
[Amit Varma]: of names and a litany of people who should really be better known to the world. And then,
[Amit Varma]: you know, so one question is that what made this continuity possible, because it is not
[Amit Varma]: like there was a demand for it. You had in the political marketplace, you had all of
[Amit Varma]: these people doing stuff, which because they felt it was the right thing to do, even though,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you would have imagined that the opposition comes to power, they will want
[Amit Varma]: to define themselves as different from the previous guys. But no, there is this thread
[Amit Varma]: of continuity that goes on till the end of UPA one. And, you know, so where do you think
[Guest]: it came from? Was it a happy accident? Well, I mean, I like to think that success successive
[Guest]: governments, obviously, when when you have an election, it's fair game, each political
[Guest]: party criticize the other. When one of them wins, they then lay out their own policy,
[Guest]: they have the freedom to reverse policy. And what what was remarkable is that they didn't
[Guest]: reverse it. Okay. Particularly when Atal Bihari Vajpayee came in, because you know, some of
[Guest]: some of the stuff that was being done, which is that look, we are not that wedded to the
[Guest]: public sector that was part of BJP also. But opening up foreign investment, these were
[Guest]: not things that were part of the BJP. But he gave a very clear signal that that's the
[Guest]: way he wanted to go. Now, I like to think that basically, while people posture in the
[Guest]: political space, they're also aware of what are the underlying technical consensuses.
[Guest]: And there's more commonality on that than people think from the outside. I mean, that's
[Guest]: the only way of explaining it. And in the case of the Vajpayee government, they actually
[Guest]: said things like continuity with change. So it was it was it was a formula that they thought
[Guest]: was perfectly good. I mean, whether we will keep having that is the real issue. I think
[Guest]: what you need is, what you need is a much more continuous discussion of what is the
[Guest]: underlying consensus, which will make sense. And if you have a consensus on that, the politics
[Guest]: will take care of itself. That's the crux. Now to have that consensus, you need a lot
[Guest]: of debate. I mean, you cannot have a consensus, unless you have a debate which takes into
[Guest]: account different points of view. And I think we need we need more debate, in my view.
[Amit Varma]: In your book, you have this, you know, lovely anecdote about how you were sitting with Mr.
[Amit Varma]: Vajpayee and he was asked about, you know, is there any continuity and all that and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the balance between continuity and change. And he said, look at Montaik. Montaik
[Amit Varma]: is the continuity, I am the change, which is, I mean, you know, I was very flattered
[Guest]: by the Prime Minister saying that. I think there was a particular reason, you know, I
[Guest]: mean, the BJP government had done what they'd always said they would do, which is to test
[Guest]: the nuclear weapon. And there were massive reaction to that. I think he wanted to emphasize
[Guest]: that look on the economic side, this is something we've always said we'll do. And even the Congress
[Guest]: supported it. So it wasn't just a, but I think he rightly judged that what mattered to the
[Guest]: rest of the world was whether India's economic policy was going to be dismantled. And he
[Guest]: gave a very clear signal that it was not. I mean, that was a good thing to have done.
[Amit Varma]: So one of my guests on the show, Pooja Mehra, wrote this book called The Lost Decade. And
[Amit Varma]: the narrative of that essentially is that look from 91 to 2011, we had this golden period,
[Amit Varma]: everything was great, roughly till 2011. And to her, you know, moment which changes everything,
[Amit Varma]: which I know you don't quite agree with, but nevertheless, for her a moment which kind
[Amit Varma]: of changes everything are the terrorist attacks in Mumbai, because because of that Mr. Chidambaram
[Amit Varma]: gets shifted from the finance ministry to the Home Ministry, because it's felt that
[Amit Varma]: that's where you really need someone to, you know, do a strong job and do an efficient
[Amit Varma]: job, which the previous incumbent wasn't. And Dr. Singh takes over the finance ministry
[Amit Varma]: himself, but then he has to go through this heart operation. So instead Pranab Mukherjee
[Amit Varma]: becomes finance minister, reportedly at Sonia's behest, and remains finance minister for a
[Amit Varma]: period of time. And as Pooja points out, a lot of things start going wrong at that point.
[Amit Varma]: And that's when our downfall really starts. And then at a later point in time, they managed
[Amit Varma]: to kick him upstairs and Mr. Chidambaram does come back and, but it's too late, they lose
[Amit Varma]: the 2014 elections. And then remarkably, Arun Jaitley and his guys, you know, show some
[Amit Varma]: continuity for a year or so, till basically political imperatives and so on, change matters
[Amit Varma]: and everything kind of goes to hell with our economy from there. But the downturn in our
[Amit Varma]: economy is not just a Modi thing. I mean, I think this government has made it considerably
[Amit Varma]: worse, but sort of happened towards the end of UPA 1, when that kind of shift took over.
[Amit Varma]: And now I know you won't want to comment on personalities per se, but just in talking
[Amit Varma]: about the difference in sort of the movement and the direction, because it seems to me
[Amit Varma]: that that continuity kind of ended then. And it seems to me that today from the outside
[Amit Varma]: as an outsider, when I look at what's happening here, I don't see where is the constituency
[Amit Varma]: for reform, per se, or how strong is it, you would of course know better, even though you're
[Amit Varma]: outside government now, but you know, you would know better. So, I wouldn't know better.
[Guest]: I mean, being outside, I would know the same as you do. No, let me say that, you know,
[Guest]: I think if you look at, if you look at what the government says, forget about demonetization,
[Guest]: which most economists felt was disruptive. But to be fair, the demonetization effect
[Guest]: would not have lasted more than six or eight months. Okay. Then you had GST, which many
[Guest]: people and I think there's some point in it, it could have been handled better. The reform
[Guest]: itself in my view was long overdue. Glad that the government and it was the BJP that opposed
[Guest]: it when they were not in government. They had good sense to bring it in. Probably handled
[Guest]: not too well. But it's slowly kind of getting back to some sort of square one. There's talk
[Guest]: that they're going to bring about the key reforms that are needed in the rate structure.
[Guest]: I think there's some committee looking at it right now. So, I don't know what they're
[Guest]: going to do. But you know, if they do that, that will be not bad at all. For the rest,
[Guest]: I think most of what is being talked about is really a continuation of what was in any
[Guest]: case thought to be the right thing to do. Digitalization, more infrastructure, all of
[Guest]: those things. This government has given a very clear signal also that FDI is welcome.
[Guest]: So the old fear that the government would be anti-FDI is no longer true. We have to
[Guest]: wait and see at what pace these reforms actually get implemented. I mean, in a way, you know,
[Guest]: the last few years have been very difficult to judge because the economy was clobbered
[Guest]: by the pandemic, which was not a government event. I mean, you could argue whether the
[Guest]: pandemic could have been handled a little differently or not. But by and large, everybody
[Guest]: did badly. After the pandemic, we have recovered. So those who might have said that we're not
[Guest]: going to recover, clearly wrong. But I never thought that we were not going to recover.
[Guest]: We have now recovered. We are back to sort of pre-pandemic levels. Now, the real question
[Guest]: is, are we going to get back to the kind of growth that was there before the pandemic,
[Guest]: which is sort of around 4%, 5%? Or are we going to do better? The current projections,
[Guest]: which many people seem to accept, are that we might actually get 7%. Okay. I mean, if
[Guest]: we get 7% in this year, that would be a good performance, in my view. And if in that period,
[Guest]: some of what has been talked about on the reforms front actually gets done, that would
[Guest]: also be good. The thing that I feel most worried about is the lack of clarity on openness as
[Guest]: far as import duties are concerned. And are we going to sort of, I mean, on the one hand,
[Guest]: the government talks about integrating with global supply chains. This, to my mind, is
[Guest]: the right thing to do. But you know, we shouldn't think that integrating with global supply
[Guest]: chains means that the entire chain is going to be built in India, and then we're just
[Guest]: going to export. It really means that we ought to create an environment in which as people
[Guest]: lock into different types of global supply chains, they think of India as being one of
[Guest]: the portions of this multi-country kind of chain. Now, these multi-country chains are
[Guest]: not expanding as much, and the Chinese one is actually contracting. But that gives us
[Guest]: an opportunity. People are going to look for somebody that would take the place that China
[Guest]: earlier had. I don't mean replace it. I mean, we are very far behind China, but it gives
[Guest]: us a space to do better. And in my view, if we want to give that signal, we should definitely
[Guest]: not be going down the route of raising import duties, etc. That is going to be a real test.
[Guest]: If the government actually were to address the question, how do we become part of global
[Guest]: value chain, get advice from reliable people, experts in the private sector, and then take
[Guest]: action on that basis, I think you might well see a recovery of growth momentum. If it doesn't,
[Guest]: and we go back to, say, 4-5% growth, you know, that will still be better than the rest of
[Guest]: the world, because the rest of the world is very clobbered as a result of Ukraine. But
[Guest]: it will not be enough for generating the kind of employment and meeting the kind of aspirations
[Guest]: that have been raised. And I think the employment thing is really quite critical. We need to
[Guest]: get back to 7% growth for the next several years, if we want to provide halfway decent
[Amit Varma]: jobs for the youth in the country. There's a sort of one great illustration of how gradual
[Amit Varma]: change can be, is what you point out in your book about how it took 31 years to get from
[Amit Varma]: Modvad to GST, right, over this entire cycle. And I think the implementation of GST was
[Amit Varma]: so remarkably botched up that, at least for the short to medium term, GST was a huge negative
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, my sense from all the business people that I speak to and what a pain it
[Amit Varma]: was and, you know, that's the sense I get. And again, it also shows how a reform that
[Amit Varma]: is otherwise fundamentally good, like, you know, like the original conception of GST
[Amit Varma]: can run into problems, once it makes its way through the political economy and takes whatever
[Amit Varma]: shape it does. Like another example of a great reform that has, you know, been struggling
[Amit Varma]: because of state capacity issues and so on, is something that friends of mine worked on
[Amit Varma]: the IBC, right, the bankruptcy code, which is a fantastic reform, everybody agrees it's
[Amit Varma]: needed, but has not proved to be as transformative as you would think simply because state capacity
[Guest]: issues are there.
[Guest]: Dr. Raghuram G. Rajan Well, I think in the case of the IBC, yes,
[Guest]: there was a pushback, and we should have anticipated this. But you know, the pandemic mucked that
[Guest]: up quite a bit. Because given what happened to the pandemic, pressure on the RBI is quite
[Guest]: understandable, that look, given that the economy is clobbered, don't send these guys
[Guest]: through the IBC route. But now that we are recovering from the pandemic, that should
[Guest]: not be a concern anymore. And we'll have to wait and see. But yes, I agree with you, the
[Guest]: IBC is extremely important, hasn't done so well in the last year. Maybe the pandemic
[Guest]: is a reason why it didn't do so well. But again, the test is in the next year. You know,
[Guest]: these institutional reforms, I mean, if they get delayed by a year, but then they get back
[Guest]: on track, it's not a bad thing. GST, for example, yes, maybe it was rushed too much, they didn't
[Guest]: prepare enough. Maybe the software wasn't ready, whatever it is, there were too many
[Guest]: glitches. But we are now we are told that the GST Council is coming up with some fundamental
[Guest]: rate structure reform. If they do a good rate structure reform, that will be a very important
[Amit Varma]: step. But we have to see what they do. And the other thing that sort of worries me is
[Amit Varma]: that even reforms which are needed, can get embedded in a narrative battle. Because at
[Amit Varma]: this moment in time, you know, the opposition will oppose everything the government does.
[Amit Varma]: And they will always be pitched narrative battles about absolutely everything. You know,
[Amit Varma]: those times are gone wherein, you know, in 91, there are stories of how Narsimha Rao
[Amit Varma]: is speaking to members of opposing parties, telling them we are in a crisis, we have to
[Amit Varma]: do this, and the way he's managing that and the fact that they're open to it, that someone
[Amit Varma]: like a Vajpayee is open to it from the outside, the opposition is open to it. And that it's
[Amit Varma]: way more polarized than that today. I mean, a classic example being the farm laws, where
[Amit Varma]: a lot of the reforms are, most experts would agree, pretty much in the right direction,
[Amit Varma]: the Congress has proposed them in the past themselves, you know, much needed. And the
[Amit Varma]: BJP, of course, botched the politics of it completely and made a complete mess of it
[Amit Varma]: in that regard. And I had a great episode with Ajay Shah on this. So the whole thing
[Amit Varma]: was just a tragedy out and out. But the point is, whatever reforms you try to do, are going
[Amit Varma]: to run into opposition regardless of the merits of the case.
[Guest]: I don't think you know, if the government has a strong enough majority, what the opposition
[Guest]: needs is to be listened to. But I don't think it necessarily prevents the reforms. I mean,
[Guest]: you know, you have mechanisms like a Parliamentary Committee, so you send it to the Parliamentary
[Guest]: Committee, have a discussion, have some Sunway, maybe even make a concession here and there.
[Guest]: That's why I'm saying that, you know, to create a broader base, a discussion, a broader discussion,
[Guest]: including with the opposition, is a good thing. The opposition may not be persuaded. I mean,
[Guest]: in the opposition, their job is to oppose. But the public will at least perceive that
[Guest]: look, there was a discussion, they had a chance to say what they had to say. So I mean, I
[Guest]: don't think that necessarily holds up.
[Amit Varma]: So that might be a fundamental mistake. You're saying that this government made and not consulting
[Amit Varma]: widely enough and going through the processes. But there's no reason why a future government
[Guest]: can't go through those processes and make it happen.
[Guest]: They can do it now. I mean, I don't see that that's a problem.
[Amit Varma]: Fair point. So, you know, you've been very kind and giving me so much of your time today.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm really grateful. Like I said, you know, the show is called the scene and the
[Amit Varma]: unseen and you and your fellow band of travellers change the lives of so many Indians in so
[Amit Varma]: many unseen ways. So I don't know how one even expresses that gratitude. But, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in these last few minutes of this episode, rather than talk about reforms and policy
[Amit Varma]: and the narrative of what went down, for all of which I'll recommend that everyone reads
[Amit Varma]: backstage because it's such a wonderful book. Tell me a little bit about what you do these
[Amit Varma]: days, like in the break, you'd mentioned that you wanted to spend time with your grandchildren.
[Amit Varma]: So you were reading up on the Mahabharata and that led you down Mahabharata based rabbit
[Amit Varma]: holes and all of that, you know, earlier, you know, in Ishar's wonderful autobiography,
[Amit Varma]: he spoke about how you guys together, you'd watch movies of Bergman, the Seeker, Fellini,
[Amit Varma]: Polanski, all of these people. What is your life like, apart from the world of economic
[Guest]: policy?
[Guest]: Oh, well, I mean, as you say, I'm living a life of a gentleman at leisure, if you like,
[Guest]: and a grandfather, I do enjoy interacting with my grandchildren, three boys, two girls,
[Guest]: it kind of brings you to many of the things that, you know, you, you did as a kid, and
[Guest]: you do it in a very personal kind of way. I write the odd article, the odd op-ed. So
[Guest]: I'm doing a little bit of that I'm associated with the Center for Social and Economic Progress,
[Guest]: where I'm a distinguished fellow. And right now, I'm kind of focusing on problems of managing
[Guest]: climate change in India. Very interesting set of issues on policy, which bring out the
[Guest]: whole importance of the holistic whole of the economy approach. So I'm just bringing
[Guest]: out a working paper for the Center on that, which I hope those of your listeners are interested
[Guest]: in will get from the website in another three or four days. And I do as I said, I do some
[Guest]: op-eds on current issues of policy, give the odd lectures, I quite enjoy lecturing to younger
[Guest]: people. Primarily right now, what I'm trying to do is to organize my thoughts so that I
[Guest]: can produce a book sometime in the next couple of years, which will be addressed to a person
[Guest]: of the age of 23, who won't at all be interested in what happened in 91, wouldn't even have
[Guest]: been born in 91. But who would be interested in what's happening in the world ahead for
[Guest]: me in India. And so I mean, many people have done similar things. And my my big challenge
[Guest]: is, can I make it sufficiently both different and interesting? It doesn't have to be different.
[Guest]: If somebody said the right things, they want to say the same things. But you know, saying
[Guest]: it saying it to a bunch of people who are familiar with the debate is one thing, saying
[Guest]: it to a bunch of people who are 23 years old, and are not interested in the past is different.
[Guest]: And that's what I want to do.
[Amit Varma]: Godspeed and I can't wait to read that book. It's a massive challenge, like you said to
[Amit Varma]: just speak from a layman's perspective to a 23 year old and sort of convince them and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, after these decades of sort of working, what would essentially be a sequence of one
[Amit Varma]: day job after another? Do you feel that this change in pace is helping you think about
[Amit Varma]: things you would otherwise not have thought about? And if, if you had a chance, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if you got a call from the government saying, write another M document, come back and join
[Amit Varma]: us, you know, would you be open to doing that? Or have you decided that, you know, this is
[Amit Varma]: cool. I like the space. I like this rhythm. I'm going to stick with this.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, I'm 78 years old. So I would if the government wanted such a document,
[Guest]: I would strongly advise them to get ahold of some younger people and tell the younger
[Guest]: people to consult widely. You know, I think we underestimate the quality that already
[Guest]: exists even inside the government. But actually, there's a lot more outside the government
[Guest]: now than there was then. I mean, you have to remember that when I was in government,
[Guest]: most important things were done in government. There was hardly any expertise outside the
[Guest]: government. Today, that's not true. I mean, the greatest expertise on fintech is not inside
[Guest]: the government. It's outside the government. Similarly on everything. So one of the big
[Guest]: problems is getting, getting policy papers done by knowledgeable people who know the
[Guest]: market, the domestic market and the international market. I don't think it's a job for civil
[Guest]: servants, because it's impossible for someone who's just I mean, you may find civil servants
[Guest]: who pick up this stuff, because they read widely. But you want you want this to you
[Guest]: want to talk to the people who were working on it and know the inside. So something of
[Guest]: that sort is really needed for the end document of the future.
[Amit Varma]: So my penultimate question and my final one will be really brief. So this is like sort
[Amit Varma]: of the last serious question, as it were, when you think of India, if you take, say,
[Amit Varma]: a view of 15 years from now, you know, what gives you hope? And what gives you the spare
[Amit Varma]: about the trajectory we are on? Or, you know, what might happen? What might not happen?
[Guest]: Well, I'm basically a very optimistic person. I mean, you know, and that's the mental state,
[Guest]: you're an optimistic person filters out the negative signals builds up the positive. One
[Guest]: of the things I'm very positive about is that, you know, if you look at what's happening
[Guest]: in India right now, you know, you shouldn't try to make the judgment based on macro indicators.
[Guest]: You should look as it were, at new things that are happening. It's a bit like being
[Guest]: back in the Jurassic Age, which is dominated by the Tyrannosaurus Rex and various other
[Guest]: giant lizards. But the future is all the little rodents that are running about in the undergrowth
[Guest]: looking quite small. So actually, I would say that one needs to tell the story of India
[Guest]: in terms of interesting, unusual, breakaway things that are happening. And if you look
[Guest]: at it that way, there's a surprisingly large number. I mean, going back even to the question
[Guest]: we raised earlier about the status of women. I mean, you know, what you see now, Indian
[Guest]: women's hockey team, cricket team, this young Muslim woman who's won a gold medal in some
[Guest]: boxing competition or something like that. All these startups, all kinds of people experimenting
[Guest]: in new ways of farming. I mean, it doesn't yet add up into the macro. I mean, the macro
[Guest]: is full of the usual stuff. The question is, is this somehow going to create a series of
[Guest]: changes which will build momentum? I mean, one would be foolish to think that is necessarily
[Guest]: going to happen. But you know, I do think that if you're looking for positive signals
[Guest]: from a multiplicity of efforts, the only way it won't happen is if somebody goes off and
[Guest]: tries to chop off all of them. That's not going to happen. So I think there's a lot
[Guest]: of action occurring, which I hope just reaches the top in some way, in terms of visible presence
[Guest]: in the economy, etc, etc.
[Amit Varma]: Wise words. And you mentioned Jurassic Park, a little bit of trivia for you and for all
[Amit Varma]: my listeners, the Velociraptor, which, you know, is that giant marauding creature in
[Amit Varma]: the film, the actual Velociraptor was as tall as a turkey. So it was all you know, WhatsApp
[Amit Varma]: history created by Steven Spielberg, as it were. So my final question to you, therefore,
[Amit Varma]: is, and I ask this of all my guests who come on the show, that for my listeners and me,
[Amit Varma]: recommend books, music, films that you absolutely love that have been a big part of your life,
[Amit Varma]: and you want to just tell everyone go out and read this or watch this or listen to this.
[Amit Varma]: It's beautiful.
[Guest]: Ah, that's a very tough one. I mean, you know, I've loved all the great movies when I was
[Guest]: young. I've loved all the James Bonds, although over time, those have become somewhat dated
[Guest]: and not really politically correct also. I don't know. I mean, I can't, I wouldn't pick
[Guest]: any one out of them. But I do think that films, I need to get back to watching more films,
[Guest]: particularly more Bollywood films, because, you know, the interesting thing is that Bollywood
[Guest]: films reflect what's going on in the country. And I should go and spend about two or three
[Guest]: weeks looking at each of the more recent Bollywood films to know which one I want to recommend
[Guest]: to you. So I don't have a straightaway something to recommend. Anything on history, actually,
[Guest]: if you ask me, I would, I think we should just pick up a lot of the more recent, I mean,
[Guest]: I spent a lot of time, for example, reading books on the Second World War. And it's very
[Guest]: interesting how the macro narrative of the war is so hugely oversimplified. And yet,
[Guest]: when you get into detailed history of what actually went on, who goofed, who did something
[Guest]: wrong, etc. I mean, it's unbelievably rich. So I think we need a better understanding
[Guest]: of the past. And that's what historians should be doing, giving us that we don't have enough
[Guest]: of that kind of stuff, really, we should.
[Amit Varma]: Montek, thank you so much for giving me so much of your time and so many great insights.
[Guest]: Thank you. I enjoyed it. And thank you for all the nice things you said about backstage.
[Guest]: I hope it persuades some of your listeners to pick up the book and go through it. Thank
[Amit Varma]: you.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Seen and The Unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to seenunseen.in slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.